Title: An Enhanced RPA-LDA Model for Ion Stopping Power from Cold Matter to High-Energy Density Plasmas: A Unified, Open-Source Framework

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.30978v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Jul 2026 00:19:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# An Enhanced RPA-LDA Model for Ion Stopping Power from Cold Matter to High-Energy Density Plasmas: A Unified, Open-Source Framework 

T.A. Mehlhorn, 1 M.F. Gu, 2 and I. Golovkin 2

> 1)

Mehlhorn Engineering Consulting Services 

> 2)

Prism Computational Sciences 

(Dated: 1 July 2026) 

We present an enhanced random-phase-approximation–local-density-approximation (e-RPA-LDA) model for the stopping power of ions that is valid over a wide range of conditions, from cold solids through warm dense matter to high-energy-density plasmas. The electronic stopping is computed from the RPA dielectric response in the local-density approximation over an average-atom electron density obtained in a muffin-tin potential with the Flexible Atomic Code, augmented by four corrections to the earlier RPA-LDA model of Wang et al.: a strong-collision correction for large-momentum-transfer events, a static local-field correction for electron correlations, an electron-binding correction, and the higher-order Barkas and Bloch terms. The resulting proton stopping powers agree with the NIST PSTAR and IAEA databases across the periodic table and for compounds—providing a physics-based alternative to semi-empirical codes such as SRIM—and reproduce the limited published plasma data, including charged-particle transport-workshop benchmarks, time-dependent DFT calculations, and the first measurements of enhanced light-ion stopping in plasmas. We further extend the model to a complete total stopping power for protons and alpha particles by adding nuclear and ionic (elastic ion–ion) stopping to the electronic term, yielding a continuous, self-consistent description of energy deposition from cold matter to hot dense plasmas. Because the average-atom treatment includes contributions from all electrons—unlike Kohn–Sham DFT—while remaining computationally efficient and applicable to low- and high-Z targets at arbitrary temperature and degeneracy, the model is well suited to inertial fusion and high-energy-density science. The computational framework is openly available on GitHub (https://github.com/dedx-erpa/dedx ), with tabulated stopping powers and ranges for common materials in the data/ subdirectory. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The electronic stopping power of energetic ions is of fundamental importance to a broad range of applica-tions in material science, semiconductor manufacturing, medicine, radiation protection, and in fundamental and applied physics. Specific applications include ion beam analysis, ion beam implantation, ion beam machining, ion beam radiotherapy, radiation shielding, and the un-derstanding of ion stopping powers and ranges for a wide array of energetic ions in materials spanning the entire periodic table, including solids, liquids, and gases of both pure and compound materials. The two main databases for electronic stopping power are managed by the Phys-ical Measurement Laboratory of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 1 and the Interna-tional Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 2. A recent ar-ticle reviewed the electronic stopping power within the IAEA database and assessed the abundance and scarcity of available data as a function of energy and collisional systems 2. This article also describes how semi-empirical methods, such as SRIM-2013 3, are used in the analysis of experimental data. NIST’s PSTAR database provides calculated stopping powers, ranges, and related quanti-ties using the underlying methods developed by mem-bers of the report committee sponsored by the Inter-national Commission on Radiation Units and Measure-ments (ICRU) 4. The basis for the semi-empirical meth-ods underlying both databases can be found in Anderson and Ziegler’s 1977 book on the stopping and range of pro-tons in matter 5 which separates the ion stopping power into low- and high-energy contributions, joined by an intermediate interpolation at the stopping power peak. NIST only provides data for proton and alpha particles, while the IAEA database contains datasets for a wider set of heavy ions, although the largest amount of data comes from proton and alpha beam experiments. The accuracy of the stopping power and ranges pro-vided via these semi-empirical methods are strongly de-pendent on the quality and selection of the underlying experimental data. Despite the sparsity of the stopping power data and the partial range energy coverage, the ”fact that the SRIM-2013 code offers stopping power val-ues for any ion-target system, even for compounds not measured yet by means of Bragg’s rule” encourages the sometimes ”overconfident” use of the results 2. Similar semi-empirical electronic stopping power models are used in Monte-Carlo method radiation transport codes such as Geant and MCNPX, where any deficiencies may be masked in the complicated shower of energetic particles and radiation. Ref 2 notes that the decrease in the num-ber of publications, measured datasets, and data points produced for cold materials since 2015 can be attributed to the perception that the SRIM-2013 results are good enough and that there are more important experimen-tal measurements to perform. The challenges of mea-suring the electronic stopping power of low energy ions due to sensitivities to contaminants, inhomogeneities in thickness, and crystallinity are also impediments to at-tempting to augment the database. We call attention to 

> arXiv:2606.30978v1 [physics.plasm-ph] 29 Jun 2026

2the concern that the use of SRIM-2013 in the analysis of experimental stopping power data to determine target thickness, inhomogeneities, and contaminant levels could result in the propagation of systematic errors. In this pa-per, we argue that there is a need for more high-quality experimental data for normal matter to clarify conflicts in existing data and to extend the projectile-target cov-erage across a broader energy range. We also see the benefit of developing a physics-based, wide range model for electronic stopping power for normal matter, which is the intent of this research. Ion stopping power is also a fundamental transport property in plasma physics and plays a central role in a wide variety of high energy density laboratory plas-mas (HEDLP) experiments, especially charged particle energy deposition in fusion burn waves 6,7 . The stopping power of ions has been extensively studied as a primary source of energy deposition in light ion beam fusion and remains of interest in heavy ion beam experiments to gen-erate warm dense matter (WDM) and is the subject of renewed interest in heavy ion fusion (HIF) 8. The topic is also especially relevant given the exponential growth in the use of ultrashort pulse laser (USPL) systems to accelerate beams of light and heavy ions to increasingly higher energies and intensities. The stopping power of the ions is central to the generation of many diagnostic signals from inflight atomic and/or nuclear reactions. Re-cently, there has been significant interest in calculating the stopping power of warm dense matter at the Bragg peak and performing experiments that create and ana-lyze well-controlled WDM conditions 9,10 . Accurate ion stopping power models are essential in both kinetic sim-ulations (e.g. Fokker-Planck collision operator) and as the ”ion drag term” in multi-fluid plasma simulations. To advance our understanding of HEDLP science, it is vital to have high-fidelity stopping power and inflight re-action tools that are well-tested across relevant parame-ter spaces and that are readily accessible to researchers in the HEDLP community. The stopping power of the ions plays a central role in both fast proton ignition and hot spot ignition for inertial fusion energy (IFE) 8. For example, the effects of alpha-stopping on ignition and ignition criteria 11 were recent topics of discussion as re-searchers sought to understand the main impediments to ignition in NIF. In the future, it will also be important to have accurate stopping models for high-Z, non-protonic projectiles in plasmas of arbitrary composition, including high-Z plasmas. The experimental challenges in obtaining high-quality electronic stopping power data for HED plasmas are even greater than those for normal matter. Plasma stopping power experiments share the same difficulties as normal matter experiments, with the additional complications that a plasma state must be generated by some ener-getic source, that state must be diagnosed and under-stood, and in many cases, hydrodynamic motion leads to gradients in density, temperature, and charge state 12–16 .To date, most of these experiments have been limited to plasmas with electron temperatures between 1 and 100 eV. A noteworthy exception to this limited temperature regime is the experimental validation of low-Z ion stop-ping formalisms in HED plasmas in the range of 1.4–2.8 keV and 4 ×10 23 –8 ×10 23 cm −3 performed on the Omega laser 17 . The achievement of ignition in NIF 18 is both an indication that the alpha stopping power in dense DT plasmas is adequately modeled and provides a highly di-agnosed platform for gaining further insight into the tem-perature dependence of the alpha stopping power. Sev-eral experimental platforms are being developed in the US, Europe, and China to measure ion stopping power in plasmas, so we expect the validation database to ex-pand. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the development of ion-stopping mod-els that leads to the present work, including our earlier light-ion-fusion stopping models and the unified RPA-LDA model of Wang et al. Section III describes the cor-rections that define the enhanced e-RPA/LDA model. We then validate the model against cold-matter data (Sec. IV) and warm-dense-matter data (Sec. V), add the nuclear and ionic contributions that complete the total stopping power (Sec. VI), and examine energy deposi-tion and the practical sufficiency of the average-atom model (Sec. VII). Section VIII proposes experiments at the stopping-power maximum. We then summarize our results and discuss our vision for future work, both in model development and in expanding the experimental database.  

> II. BRIEF REVIEW OF ION STOPPING POWER RESEARCH

The development of theoretical models for charged par-ticle transport in plasmas has been central to the field since the beginning of plasma physics and is essential to all approaches to fusion energy. It is beyond the scope of this article to provide a comprehensive historical re-view of this topic, but it is important to note that ion stopping power continues to be a topic of significant theo-retical interest. The proceedings of two recent workshops on charged-particle transport coefficient comparisons 19,20 

provide an excellent overview of recent work on a vari-ety of approaches to modeling plasma stopping power, including those based on average atom models, as well as a number of models based on different formulations of density functional theory (DFT) and molecular dy-namics (MD). Given that most of this recent work has aimed at understanding ion stopping in fusion plasmas, the theory, modeling, and experiments have been focused on protons and alpha particles stopping in hydrogenic or hydrocarbon plasmas. This trend has also been influ-enced by the relative ease of accelerating protons using laser-driven sources, compared to heavier ion species. The electronic stopping power model reported in this paper is a continuation of work that we began in the 31980s as part of the Sandia National Laboratories light ion fusion program 21 . The goal of that program was to use beams of light ions (protons, lithium, or carbon) that were efficiently generated by modular pulsed power ac-celerators to implode and burn an ICF pellet 22 , as an alternative to laser fusion drivers. To enable the de-sign of the ICF target, we developed a finite temperature model for the deposition of ion energy by an arbitrary ion traversing a material of arbitrary composition, den-sity and temperature 23 . The model was then paired with a raytracing algorithm and implemented in the 1-D Titan and 2-D Lasnex 24 radiation hydrodynamics codes for use in the ICF target design. The main approach to light ion fusion was termed the ”greenhouse target”, which was an indirect radiation drive target where the ions pene-trated a high-Z (gold) radiation case and deposited most of their energy in a low-density foam, generating X-rays and forming a spherical hohlraum (cf. Fig. 5 of Ref. 21 ). The X-rays within the hohlraum then ablated the shell of an embedded fusion capsule and imploded the DT fuel to thermonuclear conditions. This target design required stopping power models for gold and hydrocarbon foams, 

Kα imaging 25 and spectroscopy 26 of protons incident on thin foils of aluminum or titanium to diagnose the uni-formity, transport and focused intensity of the ion beam. Gold foils were also used to Rutherford scatter ions fo-cused to the diode centerline into magnetic spectrometers and Thomson parabolas. This research in ion beam gen-eration and focus produced a 5-MeV proton beam with a power of 9 TW and a microdivergence of 16 mrad that was focused to an intensity of 5 .4 ± 0.4 TW/cm 2 and heated the first foam-filled hohlraums driven by ions to 35 ± 6 eV 27 . In 1993, we focused a 9 MeV lithium beam with a power of 5.5 TW and a microdivergence of 24 mrad to 1 .8 ± 0.4 TW/cm 228 and reached a hohlraum temper-ature of 63 ± 2 eV 29 . Kα spectra from aluminum targets irradiated by the PBFA-II proton beam showed satellite lines up to Al IX (Al +8 )30 . These parameters motivate why a wide-range stopping power model was required for low-, mid-, and high-Z targets that accounted for contri-butions from both bound and free electrons. We deem that the inclusion of this brief history is important be-cause these experiments gave the first ion stopping power in warm dense matter (WDM) regime, but they have been overlooked in recent publications. The results of these experiments, and their position in phase space will be discussed in later sections. The energy deposition model described in Ref. 23 par-titioned the total ion stopping into an electronic compo-nent for both bound and free (plasma) electrons, and an ion component for both nuclear scattering and plasma ion stopping. The bound electron stopping followed a methodology that is similar to the semi-empirical model found in SRIM-2013, in that it followed a Bethe-like stop-ping formula for high energy electrons and a Lindhard-Scharff-Schiott (LSS) model for low-energy ions, with semi-analytic estimates for how average ionization po-tentials and other quantities scaled with the degree of ionization of the plasma. For standalone calculations, a Saha model was used to calculate the plasma ¯Z for a given density and temperature. The stopping power of both plasma electrons and ions followed a traditional formulation assuming Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics. A nuclear stopping power term was added to the bound electron stopping power. The model also included a semi-empirical model for the effective charge of the projectile ion that allowed the calculation of the stopping power of high-Z ions. The calculated results were in good agree-ment with tabulated ranges and stopping powers for cold materials for both protons and uranium. The model demonstrated an initial range shortening with increasing plasma temperature as the target material ionized and the free-electron contribution to the stopping power led to a net increase in the total stopping power. As the tem-perature continued to increase and the free electron ther-mal velocity became greater than the projectile velocity, the stopping power decreased, and the range lengthened. (cf. Fig. 15 of Ref. 23 ). The model was partially validated by comparing with data from the first enhanced stop-ping power experiments performed at the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) using intense deuteron beams that ir-radiated Mylar and aluminum targets 13 . The results also compared well with proton stopping power experiments performed on the PROTO I accelerator on Mylar, alu-minum, and nickel 14 . We had concerns about the simple analytic scaling of the average ionization potential and related atomic physics in the bound electron model with increasing Z and began looking at more sophisticated atomic physics options, such as the Generalized Oscil-lator Strength (GOS) model 31 . At this time, we also began to conceive of using Lindhard’s dielectric response method combined with the local density approximation (LDA) to calculate these terms. We will return to these initial stopping power experiments in Section V B, where we will compare the model presented in this paper with the data and previously published calculations.  

> A. Unified RPA ion stopping power model

Our next advance in calculating the stopping power of ions in ICF-relevant plasmas was to develop a unified self-consistent model that did not artificially separate the bound from the free electrons and was not divided into low- and high-energy approximations 32 . Rather than us-ing the Lindhard dielectric response method to calcu-late corrections to terms in the semi-empirical models in the previously discussed stopping power code, this model included sophisticated treatments for the electron density distribution of an atom in plasmas and a full random phase approximation (RPA) stopping function that extrapolated the zero temperature Lindhard stop-ping function to arbitrary temperatures. This RPA stop-ping power function was calculated in the local density approximation (LDA) for an electron density distribu-tion function that was calculated in a self-consistent-field 4”atom in jellium” model 33 in a ”muffin-tin” configura-tion. This model has most of the simplicity of an isolated atom model, but captures much of the band structure. This unified RPA-LDA model was in reasonable agree-ment with the experimental NIST data for both neu-tral aluminum and gold and was significantly more accu-rate than the results calculated using an isolated atom model. These calculations relied on the zero tempera-ture Lindhard function. We then implemented Maynard and Deutsch’s 34 temperature-dependent stopping func-tion and compared the finite temperature RPA-LDA re-sults with calculations for the electronic proton stopping power from the scaled Bethe model, as well as some using the GOS model. The RPA-LDA model showed a mono-tonic decrease in the proton range with ionization up to a ¯Z of 20 in a gold plasma. The results fell between those for the scaled-Bethe and GOS models and await future experiments to provide validation data. Although the neutral matter calculations came close to the NIST data for a representative sample of materials across the peri-odic table, there were sufficient differences in the stop-ping power peak and low energy regions to not be fully satisfied with the model. Further, the combined Liber-man and finite-temperature RPA models were not easy to use, and it was not practical to distribute the code to the plasma physics community. A three-part analytic fit for the stopping power results was generated with the idea that tables could be built to use the results in a radiation-hydrodynamics code, but this was never imple-mented. Ref. 32 concluded with the observation that the model was in the framework of the first-Born approxima-tion for the projectile and that the approximation was not appropriate for low-energy heavy ions. The paper ends with the suggestion that higher order Born corrections, including the Barkas and Bloch term be included in the model. Incorporating these higher order corrections is the core advancement in this paper. In the next section, we revisit the unified RPA-LDA model and describe the enhancements that we have made to include higher order Born corrections. We then compare the results of the enhanced RPA/LDA (e-RPA/LDA) with data for stop-ping in normal (cold) materials and compare the results with experimental data from NIST and IAEA databases. We then compare the results of our e-RPA/LDA model with data and other calculations for plasmas, including the WDM region.  

> III. ENHANCEMENTS TO RPA MODEL BEYOND THE PREVIOUS UNIFIED MODEL

The main effort of this research has been the develop-ment and validation of a comprehensive, state-of-the-art electronic stopping model for ions in HED plasmas based on the unified model of the finite temperature random phase approximation formalism of Wang, Mehlhorn, and MacFarlane 32 by including enhancements to the RPA for-malism (e-RPA) beyond the first Born approximation. The e-RPA model is combined with the local density approximation as applied to electron distribution func-tions (e-RPA/LDA). In this enhanced model we have re-placed the Liberman “atom-in-jellium” model with elec-tron distribution functions computed using the Flexible Atomic Code, FAC 35 . FAC calculates various atomic radiative and collisional processes, including radiative transition rates, collisional excitation, and ionization by electron impact, energy levels, photoionization, and au-toionization, and their inverse processes radiative recom-bination and dielectronic capture. FAC has been ex-tensively utilized in various research studies for simulat-ing steady-state plasmas under non-local thermodynamic equilibrium conditions, particularly in photoionization-dominated plasmas. A primary goal of the FAC code is to integrate multiple atomic processes within a uni-fied theoretical framework, ensuring consistency across different components and providing a user-friendly in-terface for accessing computational tasks efficiently. Akey factor in using FAC as part of this unified model is that it is a publicly available software package for com-puting essential atomic data, with a focus on integrat-ing diverse atomic processes cohesively and its demon-stration of numerical techniques for efficient computa-tion, thereby benefiting research in astrophysics, plasma physics, and related fields. The resulting enhanced uni-fied e-RPA/LDA model once again avoids the unphysical jumps in stopping power that can occur when bound and free electrons are treated separately. Our goal has been to provide a single comprehensive, efficient, and robust framework for computing energetic ion energy deposition and in-flight reactions in HED plasmas spanning the rel-evant parameter space.  

> A. RPA dielectric response and local density approximation

In the dielectric response formalism, the electronic stopping power of an ion with charge z and velocity v

in a uniform electron gas of density ρ can be written as 

Se = − dE dx = 4 π

 zv

2

ρL (ρ, v ) = 2

π

 zv

2 Z ∞

> 0

dk k

Z kv 

> 0

dωω Im 

 1

ϵ(k, ω )

 (1) where ϵ(k, ω ) is the dielectric response function, and 

L(ρ, v ) is the stopping function. For electrons with non-uniform density distribution, we apply the local density approximation, and compute the total stopping power as: 

− dE dx = 4 π

 zv

2 Z

d−→r ρ (−→r )L(ρ, v ). (2) Here z is the charge of the projectile ion. For the light 5ions considered in this paper it is fully stripped and equal to the nuclear charge, so all results reported here (pro-tons and alpha particles) are free of charge-state am-biguity. For partially stripped heavier projectiles we retain the first-order velocity-dependent effective-charge model of Wang et al. 32 —a Betz-type scaling, zeff =

Z1[1 − 1.034 e−v/ (v0Z0.69 1 )] in the implementation—which reproduces the Z21 dependence of the stopping in cold and warm matter. Because the charge state of a fast ion in a hot plasma can depart substantially from this cold-matter equilibrium—a key requirement of the exper-iments discussed in Sec. VIII—a self-consistent plasma charge-state model remains future work. In our model, the density distribution surrounding an ion is assumed to be spherical symmetric and calculated in the average atom model (AA) with a muffin-tin-type potential, taking into account the screening effect of the continuum electrons. As mentioned above, the Flexi-ble Atomic Code 35 has been used for the AA calcula-tions. At finite temperature, the dielectric function in the random phase approximation 36 is used, and there-fore we refer to the method as RPA-LDA approximation. The RPA method in our enhanced model uses the same formulation of the Maynard and Deutsch 34 formulas for the temperature-dependent stopping function, including the interpolation formula developed by Wang et al 32 for L(T, ρ,V) that bridges the accurate asymptotic expression for the stopping number in both the small and large pro-jectile velocity limits. The unified RPA/LDA in Ref. 32 

was applicable to cold neutral materials, warm dense matter, and hot plasmas, although the results for neu-tral atoms agreed better at large velocities (the Bethe regime), than at the stopping power peak and the low energy regime. We now discuss the various correction terms that we have added to the RPA formulation to address these shortcomings. We have implemented the following correction terms to improve the accuracy and range of applicability of the RPA-LDA approximation.  

> B. Correction terms in the strong coupling regime

As described by Zwicknagel, Toepffer, and Reinhard 36 ,standard approaches to the energy loss of ions in plas-mas when using the dielectric linear response or the bi-nary collision model are strictly valid only in the regimes where the plasma is close to ideal and the coupling be-tween projectile-ion and the plasma target is sufficiently weak. The motivation behind their study of this regime was the application of these methodologies to heavy ion driven inertial fusion and the cooling of beams of charged particles by electrons. They extended conventional lin-ear mean-field treatments using many-body methods and particle simulations to account for strong correlations be-tween the particles and for nonlinear coupling. They reported that quantum effects such as the wave nature of the electrons and Pauli-blocking reduce the stopping power by mollifying the effective interactions. We imple-mented these corrections by accounting for the fact that the integration over the momentum transfer, k, must be truncated at a certain maximum, km, above which the collisions become too strong for the perturbation theory underpinning the linear response formalism to be valid. In the regime where k > k m, the contributions are in-stead calculated with binary collision theory as described by equations 55–59 in Ref. 36 . 

> C. Local field correction terms

When the electrons in metals, laser-compressed plas-mas, and the interiors of heavy planets form a strongly coupled system, RPA is not applicable and the stan-dard Lindhard function needs to be extended. This occurs when the Coulomb coupling constant rs ≡

(3 /4πn )1/3 me 2/ℏ2 is greater than unity. Following the polarization-potential approach, strong coupling effects are introduced through local field correction G(k, ω ), so that the dielectric function is modified to be: 

ϵLF C (k, ω ) = 1 − 1 − ϵ(k, ω )1 + [1 − ϵ(k, ω )] G(k, ω ) (3) We have experimented with various formulations of dy-namic local field correction G(k, ω ), including those based on the Mermin dielectric function, as well as some other interpolation methods. We have found the best im-provements in accuracy using the static local field correc-tion G(k, ω = 0), of Ichimaru and Tago 37 for our mod-els. Therefore, we have chosen to adopt this method rather than the more complex methods associated with dynamic local field corrections. They report that their fitting formula for the dielectric function of a strongly coupled degenerate electron liquid satisfies several self-consistency conditions and accurately reproduces quan-tum Monte Carlo results. Their static local field correc-tion is given by 

G(q) = AQ 4 + BQ 2 + C +



AQ 4 +



B + 83 A



Q2 − C



× 4 − Q2

4Q ln 2 + Q

2 − Q

(4) where 

A = 0 .029 (0 ≤ rs ≤ 15) 

B = 916 γ0 − 364 [1 − g(0)] − 16 15 AC = − 34 γ0 + 39 16 [1 − g(0)] − 16 15 A

(5) and r s, γ0, and g(0) are defined by equations (4), (5), and (7) of Ref. 37 . They report that this formula satis-fies the self-consistency conditions in the compressibility sum rule and the short-range correlation. They further 6note that this formulation does not account for dynamic frequency-dependent effects that can be important in de-scribing the detailed features in the spectral function of the density-fluctuation excitations, but we have found it to be adequate for this average atom approach to calcu-lating electronic stopping power. As noted above, the standard RPA formulation for the dielectric function is only appropriate for ideal targets, and nonideal targets require higher corrections 37 . Inter-estingly, density functional theories are usually used to incorporate higher correlations into an effective interac-tion that maintains the simple structure of the linear re-sponse. The Kohn–Sham equations with energy-density functionals derived from the local density approximation (LDA) are often used. The alternative to this is to use a local field correction (LFC) technique, such as the one we have implemented. Density functional theory (DFT) is a powerful technique for calculating the electronic struc-ture of atoms, molecules, and solids, especially solid-state band structures. Finite temperature extensions to DFT and molecular dynamics (MD) have also been used to calculate the electrical conductivity for warm plasmas 38 , Hugoniots and equations of state (EOS) 39 , as well as other electrical properties, such as the reflectivity of shocked plasmas 40 . The success of DFT in providing conductivity, reflectivity, and EOS data has encouraged exploration of its application to calculate the electronic stopping of WDM. For example, White et al. 41 used a mixed stochastic-deterministic time-dependent density functional theory (mDFT) to calculate the proton stop-ping power in a carbon plasma at T = 10 eV and various densities. However, the mDFT calculation only treats electrons 2s and 2p in detail, and the 1s contributions are estimated using the model of Casas, Barriga-Carrasco and Rubio 9. Although we will compare our results with those of mDFT and experimental data in Section V A, it is important to note that our e-RPA/LDA calculations include LFCs and other corrections that incorporate the physics found in the DFT formalism into an average atom approach that is much more computationally efficient. Further, our RPA/LDA code inclusively treats plasma, outer shell, and inner shell electrons within a single uni-fied model, avoiding potential pitfalls that can arise from the combination of results from disparate calculations. Moreover, we have found e-RPA/LDA to be accurate and computationally practical for high-Z elements, such as gold, for which DFT calculations become increasingly challenging. By making our e-RPA/LDA model open source and available on GitHub, we hope to encourage the broader stopping power community to further ex-plore and quantify the tradeoffs between DFT and LFC approaches to effective interaction physics.  

> D. Binding frequency correction

We also correct for the fact that the RPA-LDA loss function L(˜ ρ, v ) depends only on the local density and does not distinguish whether the electrons are bound or free. Our starting point is the discussion by Esbensen and Sigmund 42 on the constraints on electron motion caused by local binding forces. Their analysis describes the im-pact of the simultaneous presence of a single-electron binding frequency and a plasma frequency on distant col-lisions in a free electron gas. To that end, we introduce an effective electron density ˜ ρ, such that the loss function at any given radius is given by L(˜ ρ, v ), and the effective density is defined through a correction to the plasma fre-quency, 

ω2 

> p

= 4 πρ 

fωp2 = 4 πeρ

fωp2 = ω2 

> p

+ γ2ω2 

> b

,

(6) where ωb is the mean binding energy of the electrons. In an average atom mode, and at any given radius, the electron density has contributions from different orbitals, although generally one or two subshells dominate. We calculate the mean binding energy as: ln ωb(r) = X

> i

fi(r)ln Ii (7) where fi(r) is the fractional contribution of the i-th bound shell at radius r, and Ii is the binding energy of that shell. In this correction term, the empirical param-eter γ is adjusted to match the experimental measure-ments of the stopping powers in cold materials. We have found that γ2 = 0 .75 provides the best fit to the exper-imental data and this is the value that we use in our model.  

> E. Barkas effect

The Barkas effect, or the effect Z31 , is the dependence of the stopping power of a heavy charged particle penetrat-ing through a random medium on the projectile charge. The size of the effect was deduced by measuring that the stopping power of antiprotons is 3–19% lower than that for protons over the same energy range and is interpreted as a charge dependent polarization effect. Our implemen-tation of the Barkas effect is estimated using the formal-ism contained in equations 7.12 and 7.13 in Esbensen and Sigmund 42 . Expressed in terms of y = kmax v/α 0

this becomes: 

L1 = π e1emv 3 α0 LB (y) (8) where 

LB (y) = 13 (5 − ζ2/2) log y + 13 (1 − ζ2/4) 

×



1 + y2

2 [1 − (1 + 8 /y 2)1/2] + 4 log 1 + (1 + 8 /y 2)1/2

4



(9) 7with ζ2 = ω20 /α 20.However, the Barkas term derives from a perturba-tive expansion ( Z3) that diverges at energies below the stopping-power peak, so we suppress it at low projec-tile energy with an empirical cutoff adjusted to repro-duce the cold dE/dx data. In the implementation, the Barkas contribution is multiplied by two factors: a degen-eracy prefactor ∝ (v2 

> F

/v 2 

> e

)2 and a projectile energy factor exp[ −(Ec/E )1/2], where E is the projectile energy and 

Ec is a cutoff energy proportional to the peak stopping-power energy Ep (with a weak, fitted dependence on the target areal density). Here ve is the electron thermal velocity that includes degeneracy, reducing to the Fermi velocity vF in the degenerate limit, and vF is the Fermi velocity. The net effect is to switch the Barkas correction off smoothly once the projectile velocity falls below the characteristic electron velocity; in a hot, weakly degen-erate plasma, the ( vF /v e)4 prefactor renders the Barkas contribution negligible. At one higher order in the projectile charge we include the Bloch ( Z41 ) correction, which bridges the perturba-tive Bethe and classical Bohr limits and reduces the stop-ping as the projectile–electron coupling y = Z1e2/ℏv ap-proaches unity. It is added to the local loss number as 

LBloch = −y2 P

> n≥1

[n(n2 + y2)] −1; because y depends only on the projectile charge and velocity, the term is identical in cold matter and in a plasma (a property of the local-density treatment). Like the Barkas term it is a high-velocity expansion that diverges as the stopping number becomes small near the peak, so it is regularized by a smooth velocity cutoff exp[ −(vcut /v )4] that vanishes at the low-velocity cold-matter peaks and is restored at the higher velocities of hot plasmas, with the single con-stant vcut fixed so the cold-matter stopping is unchanged.  

> IV. VALIDATION AGAINST COLD-MATTER DATA

Verification and validation against the best available data is the organizing principle of this work. We proceed from the most tightly constrained regime – cold mat-ter, for which large curated databases exist—to the least constrained—high-energy-density plasmas—quantifying the improvement of the enhanced e-RPA/LDA model over the bare RPA at each step. In re-establishing this chain we also draw renewed attention to the ground-breaking light-ion plasma-stopping measurements of the 1980s, which remain the only data in a region of parame-ter space that modern campaigns have not revisited. We begin with cold matter, where the stopping power is most accurately known and where the empirical parameters of the model are fixed once and for all.  

> A. Elemental targets

We have been developing and implementing strategies to perform rigorous model validation against a variety of data sets. For example, cold stopping data (e.g., NIST) have been used to evaluate the accuracy of the RPA model and explore inclusion of dynamical local field cor-rections and the Barkas effect in the e-RPA/LDA model. As described in the previous section, our model con-tains some empirical parameters, such as γ in the bind-ing energy correction and the cutoff energy of the Barkas effect. These parameters were adjusted by comparing our computed results with extensive experimental mea-surements of proton stopping power in cold targets. It is encouraging that the same set of parameters provides a satisfactory fit to measurements over a wide range of atomic numbers. Figure 1 shows the comparison of our calculated stopping powers of proton in C, Al, Ag, and Au (panels a–d) with the experimental results. These results show that our model provides improved descrip-tions of the measurements over the original RPA-LDA method, especially at low energies and near the Bragg peak. Quantitatively, taking the semi-empirical values of PSTAR as reference and averaging over the four tar-gets, the e-RPA corrections reduce the mean absolute deviation from about 12% (RPA) to about 4% over the full energy range and from about 29% to about 5% be-low the Bragg peak ( E < 50 keV), where the strong-collision, local-field, binding-energy and Barkas correc-tions are largest. At the Bragg peak, the corrected model reproduces aluminum, silver, and gold to within 0–5%, while the uncorrected RPA-LDA underestimates the peak by 10–16%; carbon is the exception, where the corrected model overshoots the peak by 16%. The Bragg peak is also where the experimental database is least cer-tain: for gold and silver, the measurements scatter by about ±10% (rms) through the peak –three to four times their ∼ 3% scatter at high energy—so the calculation lies well within the data spread there. It is informative to examine the relative contribution at different radii to the total stopping power at various projectile energies. Figure 2 shows, for a proton in the cold Al target at three energies (0.1, 1 and 11 MeV), the electron density profile 4 πr 2ρ(r), the loss function 

L(r), the integrand 4 πr 2ρ(r)L(r) of the LDA integral, and the cumulative fraction of the stopping power within a given radius; the red marker indicates the median stop-ping depth (50%). As the projectile energy increases, the median stopping depth moves inward (from about 2.2 to 0.8 atomic units), showing that faster projectiles probe the more tightly bound inner-shell electrons. Finally, the corresponding proton ranges in C, Al, Ag, and Au, obtained by integrating the e-RPA/LDA elec-tronic stopping, track the PSTAR database from high energy down through the Bragg peak; at the lowest en-ergies, the electronic-only range runs above PSTAR be-cause elastic nuclear (ion–ion) stopping, which PSTAR includes and which dominates only in the last few percent 8 

> FIG. 1. Calculated proton stopping power in (a) carbon, (b) aluminum, (c) silver, and (d) gold compared with experimental measurements (red), the PSTAR semi-empirical fit (black), the e-RPA/LDA model (blue, solid), and the uncorrected RPA-LDA (orange, dashed). The corrections bring the model into agreement with the data through the Bragg peak, where the uncorrected RPA-LDA runs low.

of energy, is not yet present. We add that contribution in Sec. VI: the complete proton range (electronic plus nuclear) is shown there in Fig. 13, reproducing PSTAR across the full energy range, with panel (a) isolating the closure of this low-energy overshoot.  

> B. Compound targets

We have developed an average atom model based pro-cedure to obtain the electron density distribution of com-pounds. Each component atom is assumed to be confined in its own unit cell with radius ri, so that the total vol-ume is equal to that of the unit cell of the compound. The values of ri are then iteratively adjusted using the average atom model so that the free electron densities at the radius ri are the same for all constituents. This ensures that all components share the same free elec-tron background and are therefore in pressure equilib-rium. The stopping powers are then calculated for each constituent within its own unit cell, the sum of which provides the stopping power of the compound. Figure 3 compares the resulting stopping of protons for SiO 2, LiF, liquid water, and Al 2O3 (panels a–d) with the PSTAR fit and experimental data. The procedure reproduces the measurements above the Bragg peak in every case; be-9    

> FIG. 2. Radial origin of the proton stopping in cold Al at proton energies of 0.1, 1, and 11 MeV: the radial electron density 4πr 2ρ(r), the loss function L(r), the integrand 4 πr 2ρ(r)L(r), and the cumulative fraction of dE/dx within radius r. The red marker is the median (50%) stopping depth, which moves inward as the projectile speeds up.

low and through the peak the gapless dielectric response overshoots for the wide-gap insulators—most strongly for LiF and water, moderately for SiO 2, and negligibly for 

Al 2O3—which motivates the band-gap correction devel-oped in the next subsection.  

> C. Band-gap correction for cold insulators

For cold ionic insulators, the average-atom e-RPA/LDA model overshoots the measured electronic stopping through the Bragg peak, because the valence electrons are given a gapless free-electron-gas response that spuriously allows low-frequency excitations forbid-den by the material’s band gap. We impose a Levine– Louie 43 band gap on the dielectric response: the energy-loss function is zeroed below a threshold Eg and the os-cillator strength is shifted upward, preserving the f-sum rule. The threshold is tied to the binding frequency of the atom, Eg (r) = κ ω b(r), where ωb(r) is the geometric-mean binding energy of the average-atom [Eq. (7)] and 

κ is a single dimensionless constant; because ωb derives from the occupations of the average-atom, it evolves con-tinuously with temperature and density, so the correc-tion self-extinguishes as the material ionizes. A single 

κ = 0 .7 removes the cold overshoot for the wide-gap insulators where the gapless model runs high (Fig. 4): the correction scales with the material gap — largest for LiF ( Eg about 14 eV) and smaller for SiO 2 and 

Al 2O3 — emerging automatically from ωb without any per-material tuning. We present κ = 0 .7 as a repre-sentative value rather than a precisely determined con-stant, since the experimental spread between datasets (10–20%) precludes a tighter calibration. Liquid water, whose stopping is anomalous (breakdown of Bragg addi-tivity, hydrogen-bond-modified dielectric response), lies outside this average-atom, Bragg-additive framework and is shown for completeness only.  

> V. VALIDATION IN WARM DENSE MATTER

Having fixed the model against cold-matter data, we now apply it in the warm dense matter (WDM) and partially ionized plasma regimes, where experimen-tal data are sparse, and the various theoretical ap-proaches diverge most. We proceed in two steps. We first benchmark the model against the first-principles and average-atom calculations collected in the two charged-particle transport-coefficient comparison work-shops 19,20 , against published time-dependent density-functional-theory (TD-DFT) calculations, and against a parameter-free absolute experiment. We then turn to the first measurements of enhanced light-ion stopping in plas-mas, performed at NRL and Sandia in the 1980s, which our cold-calibrated model reproduces without further ad-justment and which we argue remain an underused con-straint on plasma stopping models.  

> A. Transport-workshop, DFT, and parameter-free benchmarks

After calibrating our model using experimental results on cold targets, we applied it to warm dense plasma conditions. The two charged-particle transport-coefficient comparison workshops 19,20 assem-bled blind comparisons of stopping-power models –spanning average-atom, molecular-dynamics, and sev-eral density-functional formulations—against common benchmark conditions and provide the most direct mea-sure of where a given model sits within the modern the-oretical spread. We first compare against the quantum Gould–DeWitt (qGD) reference from the first workshop, in which the stopping power of an α particle in a uniform electron gas was presented; qGD combines a Lenard– Balescu treatment of weak collisions with a T-matrix treatment of close collisions and is a standard benchmark 10  

> FIG. 3. Proton stopping power in the compounds (a) SiO 2, (b) LiF, (c) liquid water, and (d) Al 2O3: average-atom e-RPA/LDA without the band-gap correction (blue, solid) versus the PSTAR fit (black) and experimental data (red). The gapless dielectric response overshoots through the Bragg peak for the wide-gap insulators—most strongly for LiF and water, moderately for SiO 2, negligibly for Al 2O3—motivating the band-gap correction of Sec. IV C. Water is anomalous (Bragg additivity breaks down) and shown for completeness only.

in these comparisons. Figure 5 compares our model with the qGD reference: panel (a) versus projectile energy at 

ne = 10 25 cm −3 and T = 1 keV, panel (b) versus elec-tron temperature at a fixed projectile energy of 3.5 MeV, and panel (c) versus electron density at 3.5 MeV. The e-RPA/LDA model tracks the qGD result across all three. Next there have been recent developments of applying density functional theory to the calculation of electronic stopping powers. White et al. 41 used a mixed stochastic-deterministic time-dependent density functional theory (mDFT) to calculate the proton stopping power in a car-bon plasma at T = 10 eV and various densities. Fig-ure 6 shows a comparison of our model and the results of mDFT for the carbon density of 3.5 g/cc and T = 10 eV. The mDFT calculation only treats the 2 s and 2 p elec-trons in detail, and the 1s contributions are estimated with the model of Casas, Barriga-Carrasco and Rubio 9.However, it is seen that our model agrees well with the mDFT results without inclusion of the 1s contributions. We estimate that the 1s contributions at energies near or below the Bragg peak should be completely negligible. A radial decomposition of the stopping (as in Fig. 2) con-firms this: at a proton energy of 33 keV (velocity 1.1 a.u.) the 1 s electrons, mostly confined within r < 0.5 a.u., con-11      

> FIG. 4. Band-gap correction for cold insulators. Total proton stopping ( κ= 0 .7 electronic band gap + Gordon–Kim nu-clear) for LiF, SiO 2,Al 2O3, and H2Ovs PSTAR and exper-iment; the gapless electronic-only curve (dotted) overshoots through the Bragg peak. Water is anomalous and shown for completeness only.

tribute less than 1% of the stopping power in the carbon plasma at T = 10 eV and 3.5 g/cc. We, therefore, find it puzzling that the 1s contributions in Fig. 11 increase with decreasing projectile energy. Malko et al. 10 recently published experimental and the-oretical results of proton stopping in a warm dense car-bon plasma with a density of 0 .5 g/cc, and temperatures of 10, 20 and 30 eV. For the covered proton energies, the results of the density functional theory calculations show little temperature dependence, while several differ-ent theories show a wide variation of stopping powers near the Bragg peak. Figure 7 shows the comparison of DFT and the present model. This Figure shows that our results are in close agreement with DFT calculations for these conditions. The same average-atom framework lets us extend the comparison with time-dependent density functional the-ory begun in Fig. 6. The recent multi-code benchmark of Stanek et al. 20 reports on the TD-DFT-MD reference stopping for alpha particles in hydrogen, carbon, and alu-minum, together with the authors’ own average-atom re-sults. As in the mixed-DFT calculation of White et al., the TD-DFT-MD treatment calculates the valence elec-trons explicitly and adds a separately estimated deep-core contribution. Fig. 8 overlays our e-RPA/LDA result for the carbon case on the Stanek TD-DFT-MD points and on Stanek’s two average-atom curves. Our inde-pendent e-RPA/LDA peak falls between the two Stanek average-atom curves, and all three average-atom models sit about 20–30% above the TD-DFT-MD data near the Bragg peak while converging on the common Bethe limit at high velocity. The excess near the peak therefore ap-pears to be a property of the average-atom treatment as a class, not of our particular implementation. This is a good example of where new experimental data could have a significant impact on validating these models. The decomposition extended across the projectile ve-locity (again as in Fig. 2) shows that for aluminum the median stopping depth lies among the loosely bound va-lence and conduction electrons near the Wigner–Seitz ra-dius at low velocity (about 2.4 atomic units) and moves inward to the inner shells only as the projectile becomes fast (to about 1 atomic unit near 1 MeV/u); through-out the velocity range of the Stanek and Malko com-parisons the deep core contributes little. We note that the average-atom model captures the inner-shell physics self-consistently over the full velocity range, without the separately estimated core term that the time-dependent density functional calculations must append—a practical advantage of the unified e-RPA/LDA approach. Finally, Zylstra et al. 44 provide a parameter-free ab-solute test: the energy downshift of 14.7 MeV D-3He protons through a 94 mg/cm 2 beryllium foil; both cold and warm ( Te = 32 eV). With the areal density taken from the paper and no fitting, our e-RPA/LDA model reproduces the measured downshift — ∆ E = 2 .87 MeV (cold) and 2.97 MeV (warm) vs measured 2.72 and 2.85– 2.98 MeV — and matches the authors’ own average-atom LDA values (2.80, 2.87), the framework they found con-sistent with the data, to within about 3% (Fig. 9). Be-cause the foil is flat with a known areal density, this is a genuine parameter-free absolute comparison.  

> B. The first light-ion plasma measurements

Young et al. 13 reported the first measurements of en-hanced ion stopping in a dense plasma: the energy loss of 1 MeV deuterons in aluminum and Mylar tar-gets heated by an intense light-ion beam, diagnosed with planar diodes (50 kA/cm 2) and spherical diodes (250 kA/cm 2). Hydrocode simulations of the experiment give peak electron temperatures of 4–5 eV (Al) and 2 .5– 3.5 eV (Mylar) at the planar-diode current density, rising to 13–17 eV (Al) and 9–11 eV (Mylar) at the spherical-diode level. Figure 10 reproduces their Fig. 4 and over-lays our e-RPA/LDA energy loss evaluated at both the cold (0 .025 eV) and the hydrocode-inferred plasma tem-peratures. The heated e-RPA/LDA calculation repro-duces the measured enhancement at the higher current density—about 40% in Al and 45% in Mylar—while the cold calculation matches the lower-current data, sup-porting the original interpretation that the enhancement arises from stopping by the liberated free electrons in addition to the bound electrons. Olsen et al. 14 measured enhanced proton stopping in beam-heated aluminum and nickel foils, recording the en-ergy loss of a 1.6 MeV proton beam with a time-resolved Thomson-parabola analyzer and interpreting it with a one-dimensional hydrocode simulation of the heated tar-get. At peak intensity, they inferred electron tempera-tures of about 48 eV (Al) and 42 eV (Ni), average ioniza-tions ¯Z ≈ 8 – 10 (Al) and 9 – 12 (Ni), and stopping-power 12 

FIG. 5. Stopping power of an α particle in a uniform electron gas: e-RPA/LDA (blue) versus the quantum Gould–DeWitt (qGD) benchmark (orange). (a) Versus projectile energy at ne = 10 25 cm −3 and T = 1 keV; (b) versus electron temperature at a fixed projectile energy of 3.5 MeV; (c) versus electron density at 3.5 MeV. 

FIG. 6. Stopping power of proton in a carbon plasma with density 3.5 g/cc and temperature of 10 eV. 

FIG. 7. Stopping power of proton in a carbon plasma with density 0.5 g/cc and temperatures of 10, 20, and 30 eV. 

FIG. 8. Alpha electronic stopping in carbon (10 g/cc, 2 eV) from the Stanek et al. benchmark: e-RPA/LDA (this work) compared with Stanek’s two average-atom curves and the TD-DFT-MD reference points, all on the projectile-velocity axis. 

enhancements of about 100% and 50%, respectively. The enhancement is strongly density dependent, so rather than estimate the expanded foil density we fix the tem-perature at the measured peak value and obtain the den-sity from the average-atom ionization balance—i.e. the density for which the model reproduces the measured ¯Z. Figure 11 shows the resulting enhancement of e-RPA / LDA, the reduction in the range of 1.6 MeV proton relative to cold matter, along each measured isotherm. At the consistent density, the model reproduces the alu-minum result ( ≈ 80–110% across ¯Z = 8–10) and gives 

≈ 60% for nickel at the low-ionization end of the mea-sured range, rising above it at higher ¯Z—consistent with Olsen’s observation that the nickel enhancement is strong and model dependent. The strong density sensitivity (the enhancement more than doubles between ¯Z = 7 and 13  

> FIG. 9. Zylstra 2015: energy downshift of 14.7 MeV protons through a 94 mg/cm 2Be foil, cold and warm (parameter-free). This work (red) vs the measured shots and other theories (SRIM, ICRU, AA-LDA, B+F, CIP).

¯Z = 9 along the aluminum isotherm) underscores that a faithful comparison requires the time-resolved plasma conditions, which is precisely what the hydrocode analy-sis provides.  

> C. Summary of WDM verification and validation

In summary, we find that the e-RPA/LDA model re-produces both the first measurements of enhanced stop-ping in partially ionized plasmas — the 1980s NRL and Sandia experiments of Young et al. 13 and Olsen et al. 14 

in Fig. 10 and 11 — and the modern warm-dense-matter benchmarks of Fig. 5–7. These early experiments, on mid-Z target-ablation plasmas, occupy a region of the coupling–velocity plane that the recent hydrogenic and hydrocarbon campaigns have not revisited and that the current community has largely overlooked. Evaluated from the published plasma conditions, they lie at a veloc-ity ratio vp/v th ≈ 6–7 and electron coupling Γ ≈ 0.09– 0.3 (Fig. 12), squarely among the modern campaigns and adjacent to the cold-fuel alpha-stopping condition rather than in an isolated corner of the parameter space. That a single e-RPA/LDA framework, calibrated only against cold-target PSTAR data, matches both these 1980s mea-surements and the recent TD-DFT and laser-plasma re-sults argues that the older data remain a valuable and underused constraint on plasma stopping models. The plasma regime of interest is bounded by the electron-coupling and degeneracy parameters Γ ≡ e2

ae kB Te

≳ 0.1, Θ ≡ kB Te

EF

≲ 10 , (10) where ae = (3 /4πn e)1/3 is the radius of the electron-sphere and EF the Fermi energy.  

> VI. A COMPLETE STOPPING MODEL: NUCLEAR AND IONIC CONTRIBUTIONS

The validation so far has concerned electronic stop-ping. To obtain a complete total stopping power— continuous from cold solids to hot dense plasmas, and accurate at the low-velocity end of the range where it dominates—we add the nuclear (elastic ion–ion) contri-bution. This term plays two distinct roles: at low pro-jectile energy in cold matter it closes the residual range gap left by the electronic-only model, and in hot dense plasmas the projectile-ion/target-ion channel becomes an appreciable, separately measurable contribution to the stopping.  

> A. Closing the cold-matter range gap

We have implemented the nuclear (elastic ion–ion) stopping power following the classical two-body scatter-ing formalism of Faussurier, Blancard, and Gauthier 45 ,using three screened pair potentials: an ion-sphere po-tential, a Yukawa potential, and a finite-temperature Gordon–Kim “peanut-molecule” potential constructed from the same average-atom electron density used for the electronic term. The Gordon–Kim form, which recovers the bare nuclear product at small separation, is the de-fault. Because the nuclear term is added to the electronic stopping on a common per-target-atom basis, the model now returns a total stopping power that is continuous from cold solids through warm and hot dense matter. Fig. 13(a) compares the CSDA range of protons in C, Al, Ag and Au — computed from electronic stopping alone and from electronic-plus-nuclear total — against the PSTAR database, whose CSDA range includes nu-14 

FIG. 10. Energy loss of 1 MeV deuterons in Mylar and alu-minum target-ablation plasmas (after Young et al. 13 , their Fig. 4), for planar (top, 50 kA/cm 2) and spherical (bottom, 250 kA/cm 2) diodes. Points with error bars are the measure-ments and green triangles the hydrocode results; black points are the cold (0 .025 eV) e-RPA/LDA calculation (solid line), and the colored points are e-RPA/LDA at the hydrocode-inferred plasma temperatures (Mylar 3 and 10 eV; Al 4 .5 and 15 eV). 

clear stopping. At the lowest energies, the electronic-only range overshoots PSTAR by 23–66% for C, Al, and Ag; adding the Gordon–Kim nuclear term brings the range into agreement with PSTAR to within a few percent, clos-ing the low-energy overshoot of the electronic-only range. For gold, the nuclear term slightly overcorrects (about 10%), consistent with the expected frozen-density over-repulsion of the Gordon–Kim potential at high atomic number. Our implementation reproduces the Faussurier’s orig-inal results. For cold proton stopping in aluminum the Gordon–Kim nuclear stopping matches the NIST/ZBL reference to within about 5% (within ZBL’s own fit un-certainty), in agreement with Faussurier et al. 45 , whose calculations used the proprietary SCAALP average-atom model. Because the Gordon–Kim potential is built from the total electron density – which integrates with the nu-clear charge by the neutral-atom constraint – the cold nuclear stopping is insensitive to the underlying average-atom model, so the SCAALP and FAC results coincide; 

FIG. 11. e-RPA/LDA stopping-power enhancement for 1.6 MeV protons in Al and Ni versus average ionization ¯Z,computed as the reduction in the proton range relative to cold matter along the measured peak isotherms ( T = 48 eV for Al, 42 eV for Ni), with the density fixed by the average-atom ionization balance. Shaded boxes are the enhancements measured by Olsen et al. 14 (≈ 100% for Al at ¯Z = 8–10; 

≈ 50% for Ni at ¯Z = 9–12). 

FIG. 12. Reported ion-stopping experiments in the velocity-ratio ( vp/v th ) and electron-coupling (Γ) plane, colored by plasma-generation method (laser plasma, X-ray driven, Z-pinch, gas discharge, exploding pusher). The orange el-lipse and light-blue box mark, respectively, the ICF alpha hot-spot and cold-fuel deposition conditions; the cold-fuel box is the warm-dense-matter region (near the Bragg peak, 

vp/v th ≲ 10, Γ ≈ 0.1–10) where the models diverge most and data are sparsest. The 1980s NRL (Young et al. 13 ) and Sandia (Olsen et al. 14 ) enhanced-stopping experiments (green stars), evaluated from their published plasma conditions, fall at vp/v th ≈ 6–7, Γ ≈ 0.09–0 .3 — inside the cold-fuel box and among the modern campaigns, yet they remain the only mea-surements in this regime and have been largely overlooked. The modern-experiment compilation is adapted from Malko et al. 10 and Frenje et al. 17 ; coordinates use Γ = e2/(aekB Te)with ae = (3 /4πn e)1/3.15 

> FIG. 13. Proton range for C, Al, Ag, and Au with and without the nuclear term. (a) Range relative to the PSTAR CSDA range: electronic stopping only (dashed) versus electronic plus Gordon–Kim nuclear (solid); the nuclear term removes the low-energy overshoot of the electronic-only range. (b) Absolute CSDA pathlength and projected (practical) range of the total (electronic + nuclear) model versus the PSTAR CSDA and projected ranges.

the FAC mean ionization ( ¯Z = 3 .0 cold, rising to about 12 .8 at 1 keV) likewise matches the SCAALP values. Be-yond reproducing the model, our implementation differs in three respects. First, the nuclear term is built from the same FAC average-atom density used for electronic stopping, so the electronic and nuclear contributions form a single self-consistent average-atom description rather than two separate calculations. Second, the Gordon– Kim overlap is evaluated with a muffin-tin (embedded-in-medium) boundary consistent with the e-RPA electronic treatment, which softens the nuclear stopping by about 5% in hot dense matter where the interstitial electron density is appreciable. Third, and most consequential for the community, the entire pipeline is built on the open-source Flexible Atomic Code: the nuclear/ionic stopping that previously required the proprietary SCAALP code is now reproducible end to end in a fully open framework. The same nuclear scattering model also provides the angular straggling that separates the CSDA path-length from the projected (practical) range tabulated by Ziegler/SRIM, Janni, PSTAR, and the IAEA. The deflection integral evaluated for nuclear stopping, S =R sin 2(θ/ 2) p dp , is the momentum-transfer (transport) cross section σtr = 4πS that drives the projectile’s multiple-angle scattering; propagating it along the track reproduces the PSTAR projected-to-CSDA range ratio for protons in aluminum from 0.1 to 10 MeV. The public package now writes both ranges. The detour is negligible (above 0.98) over most of the range and matters only in the final few percent of energy — the end-of-range re-gion where the nuclear contribution to stopping becomes significant. The total (electronic + Gordon–Kim nuclear) model also produces the two ranges that the standard tables — Ziegler/SRIM, Janni, PSTAR, and the IAEA —quote: the CSDA pathlength and the projected (prac-tical) range. Fig. 13(b) shows both protons in C, Al, Ag, and Au against PSTAR. The CSDA path length now includes the nuclear energy loss, which removes the low-energy range overshoot of the electronic-only model (cf. panel a); the projected range additionally accounts for the nuclear multiple-angle scattering through the trans-port cross section σtr = 4πS . Both reproduce the PSTAR values over the full energy range, with the pro-jected range separating from the pathlength below about 0.1 MeV, where end-of-range scattering becomes impor-tant.  

> B. Ion stopping in high-energy-density plasmas

Frenje et al. 17 found that the electronic (Brown– Preston–Singleton, BPS) stopping underpredicts the measured ion stopping near the Bragg peak in a DT plasma at Te = 2 keV, and attributed the gap to nuclear-elastic scattering and possibly coupled ion modes — the projectile-ion/target-ion channel added in this work. Fig. 14 overlays the model for a proton in DT plasma on their digitized Fig. 5, with a single areal-density scale fixed by matching the model electronic stop-ping to BPS. With the nuclear/ion term the model re-produces the measured stopping within error at three of the four probe energies; at the lowest velocity (0.19 MeV/u) the nuclear/ion channel lifts the stopping about 12% above the electronic value, in the direction of the measured low-velocity excess, and grows toward lower 16 velocity. The areal-density scale is not a free parame-ter: digitizing their measured Te(r) and ne(r) profiles gives a path-integrated electron areal density of (3 .6– 7.1) × 10 21 cm −2, and the scale that aligns the model with BPS, 5 .5×10 21 cm −2, lies within that range. This is the strongest experimental motivation for the nuclear/ion addition.     

> FIG. 14. Frenje 2019: ion stopping in a DT plasma ( Te=2 keV). Model electronic-only (dashed) and electronic + nu-clear/ion (red) vs the digitized data and BPS; the nuclear/ion channel lifts the low-velocity stopping toward the measured excess.
> VII. ENERGY DEPOSITION AND THE PRACTICAL SUFFICIENCY OF THE AVERAGE-ATOM MODEL

Electronic stopping is not a resonant process. In the Fokker–Planck picture from which the stopping power derives, the energy loss is the cumulative result of a great many small-angle Coulomb collisions; what is measured and what governs transport is the integrated energy loss and range, not the excitation energy of any particular bound orbital. An average-atom dielectric model such as e-RPA, which treats all bound and free electrons self-consistently, therefore, already captures the physics that controls energy deposition. The residual differences be-tween the average-atom and first-principles models — the ˜10–20% spread near the Bragg peak among e-RPA, RPA, and TD-DFT seen in Fig. 1 and 6 — are real, but of limited practical consequence once the finite quality of any real ion source is considered. The depth–deposition (Bragg) profile of a 10 MeV proton beam stopping in aluminum, built from the to-tal (electronic + Gordon–Kim nuclear) e-RPA stop-ping and convolved over a Gaussian energy distribu-tion of several relative widths, makes this quantita-tive. The peak for a monoenergetic beam is sharp; a 1% energy spread — characteristic of an RF acceler-ator, or of the thermal Doppler broadening of fusion-product energies — already reduces the peak deposi-tion to 37% of its monoenergetic value and broadens it sixteen-fold, and a 10–20% spread, typical of laser-wakefield (LWFA) or target-normal-sheath-acceleration (TNSA) proton beams, washes the peak out almost entirely. Against this smearing, a representative 15% stopping-model difference (the e-RPA–RPA / AA–TD-DFT spread) changes the deposited peak by 14.8% for a monoenergetic beam but by only 0.7% once a 10% spread is applied. Even an ideal monoenergetic beam cannot produce an arbitrarily sharp peak: the intrinsic Bohr range straggling ( σR = 8 .5 μm, 1.4% of the range here) sets a floor equivalent to ˜1% energy spread. The divergence of a finite beam acts similarly through geometry: a ray launched at angle θ to the axis reaches an axial depth reduced by cos θ and deposits its energy at the higher rate S/ cos θ, so a divergence distribution smears and shifts the Bragg peak just as an energy spread does. For 10 MeV protons in aluminum, a 10-degree rms divergence — typical of LWFA and fast-ignition proton beams — lowers the peak from 447 to 179 MeV/(g cm −2); combined with a 10% energy spread, it flattens the peak to 73, and a broad TNSA-like source (30%, 20 degrees) to 51, while pulling it toward the surface. In the fusion con-text, this reaches its limit: alphas and other fast charged particles are born isotropically (4 π), distributed through the burning volume, and with a thermal energy spread, so their deposition is fully volumetric and the Bragg peak does not exist at all; what then matters is the retained (self-heated) fraction, fixed by the alpha range relative to the hot-spot areal density ρR , again an integrated quan-tity that the e-RPA range gives accurately. This limit is quantified in Fig. 15, a three-dimensional Monte-Carlo transport of 3.5 MeV alphas born uniformly and isotropically through a uniform DT hot spot ( ρ =100 g/cc, T = 10 keV; alpha range Rα = 0 .083 g/cm 2), using the e-RPA Bragg deposition profile. The deposited energy density is volumetric — flat through the interior and rounded over one alpha range at the edge — with no Bragg peak at any hot-spot size. The retained (self-heated) fraction depends only on the ratio ρR/R α, reach-ing about 0.7 when ρR equals the alpha range, in agree-ment with the classic inertial-confinement result 15,46 ,and is insensitive to the detailed deposition profile (a constant-stopping reference agrees to within a few per-cent). What governs alpha self-heating is therefore the integrated alpha range — which the e-RPA model pro-vides accurately — not the differential Bragg shape. These observations also frame the relation of the present model to SRIM (Ziegler–Biersack–Littmark), the de-facto standard for cold-matter ion ranges. SRIM ob-tains its electronic stopping from a semi-empirical fit to the experimental database, its nuclear stopping from a universal screened-Coulomb potential, and its ranges and projected ranges from a Monte-Carlo binary-collision transport — all restricted to cold matter. The e-RPA model is complementary: for cold targets, it reproduces the PSTAR/SRIM-family results (Fig. 1 and 13) from a physics-based dielectric calculation rather than a fit, 17      

> FIG. 15. Alpha deposition in a DT hot spot (3-D Monte Carlo; 3.5 MeV alphas, ρ= 100 g/cc, T= 10 keV). Left: deposited energy density vs radius is volumetric, with no Bragg peak. Right: retained (self-heated) alpha fraction vs hot-spot size ρR/R α
> (e-RPA Bragg deposition; constant-stopping reference dashed).

and it extends the same framework continuously to the warm and hot dense plasmas, and arbitrary ionization, that SRIM does not treat. Where the two differ near the Bragg peak, the difference is within the model spread that, as shown above, is washed out by any realistic source. The same dielectric formulation gives e-RPA a further reach that the analytic plasma-stopping models used in fusion design do not share: the high-density, degener-ate regime. Because electronic stopping derives from the finite-temperature-RPA dielectric response of Maynard and Deutsch 34 , defined for an electron fluid of arbitrary degeneracy, e-RPA / LDA incorporates Fermi degener-acy and the associated Pauli blocking implicitly and self-consistently, without an effective-temperature patch; the local-density approximation carries this to the strongly degenerate densities found near the nucleus and in com-pressed fuel. Figure 16 illustrates the consequence for alpha stopping in equimolar DT. In the non-degenerate limit ( ρ = 10 g/cc, Θ ≡ T /E F ≈ 15) e-RPA/LDA coin-cides with the classical Brown–Preston–Singleton (BPS) result to within a few percent—an independent corrobo-ration from two unrelated formalisms—while the binary-collision Li–Petrasso–Zylstra model runs about 40% high near the peak. As the fuel becomes increasingly degener-ate, however, e-RPA falls increasingly below the classical BPS curve—by about 9% at ρ = 1000 g/cc (Θ ≈ 0.7) and 40% at ρ = 5000 g/cc (Θ ≈ 0.24)—exactly the reduc-tion in energy loss that electron degeneracy demands and that BPS, built on classical statistics, cannot reproduce. This is the physics Skupsky 47 identified as essential to charged-particle energy loss in inertial-fusion fuel, where degenerate electrons reduce the stopping below its classi-cal value and can even reflect MeV alpha particles from a Fermi-degenerate tamper, lowering the minimum ignition 

ρR 47,48 . e-RPA/LDA thus remains valid along electron degeneracy as well, complementing its reach into partial ionization, cold matter, strong coupling, and arbitrary projectile and target charge—the regimes most relevant to advanced-fuel and high-compression fusion concepts 49 .Together, these results support a pragmatic conclu-sion: for the energy-deposition profiles and ranges that drive applications — fusion alpha and proton heating, ion-beam fast ignition, ion-beam therapy, and radiation effects — an accurate, efficient average-atom model such as e-RPA, combined with the nuclear/ionic term, is suf-ficient, because its residual differences from more expen-sive first-principles methods are smaller than the irre-ducible smearing imposed by source energy spread, diver-gence, and intrinsic straggling. This is not an argument against first-principles stopping calculations, which re-main essential benchmarks, but a statement about where modeling effort is best spent for practical transport.  

> VIII. PROPOSED EXPERIMENTS AT THE STOPPING-POWER MAXIMUM

The largest disagreements among stopping-power models—and the largest experimental uncertainties— occur at the stopping-power maximum, where the pro-jectile velocity approaches the mean velocity of the tar-get electrons. This is already true in cold matter: the curated databases show their widest scatter through the Bragg peak (gold is a notable example), reflecting the ex-perimental difficulty of the measurement at low projec-tile energy. In plasmas the divergence is sharper still— perturbative and nonperturbative theories differ by 20– 30% there 50 —and it is precisely the regime that governs alpha-particle heating and ion-beam energy deposition. 18          

> FIG. 16. Alpha stopping power in equimolar DT at T= 1 keV from three models, at increasing density and electron degeneracy (Θ = T /E F): (a) non-degenerate ( ρ= 10 g/cc, Θ = 15), (b) degenerate ( ρ= 1000 g/cc, Θ = 0 .7), and (c) strongly degenerate (ρ= 5000 g/cc, Θ = 0 .24). e-RPA/LDA (this work) coincides with the classical Brown–Preston–Singleton result when the plasma is non-degenerate and falls progressively below it as degeneracy sets in (Pauli blocking), while the Li–Petrasso–Zylstra model runs high throughout. BPS, which assumes classical statistics, also becomes unreliable at low projectile velocity in the degenerate panels. The Li–Petrasso–Zylstra and Brown–Preston–Singleton curves are computed with the implementation of Borscz et al. 49 .

Cayzac et al. 51 demonstrated that this spread is ex-perimentally resolvable. Probing a laser-heated carbon plasma ( ne ≈ 5 × 10 20 cm −3, Te ≈ 150 eV) near the peak with ∼ 1% energy resolution, they disproved the standard perturbative models and found agreement only with a nonperturbative T-matrix treatment of strong ion–electron collisions. Such a measurement requires two co-diagnosed ingredients: the time-varying plasma conditions, reconstructed from radiation-hydrodynamics simulations, and the projectile charge-state distribution, which enters the stopping as Z2 

> b

and evolves through the plasma 52 . Recent benchmark experiments show that even the charge state is not the whole story—excited pro-jectile configurations contribute measurably to the stop-ping 53 .It is instructive to locate the present model among the theories based on which these experiments discrimi-nate. At the Cayzac conditions, e-RPA/LDA sits within the perturbative cluster: the plasma is weakly coupled (Γ ≈ 0.01) and non-degenerate (Θ ≈ 650), so the local-field and strong-collision corrections that distin-guish e-RPA from the bare random-phase approxima-tion are inactive, leaving the model near its first-Born value. Yet, the projectile–electron coupling is strong— 

η = Zbe2/ℏvr ≈ 1.5 for fully stripped carbon at the peak—so it is the first-Born treatment in Zb that fails, exactly the regime the T-matrix is built for. In the di-electric framework, the corresponding correction is the higher-order-in-Zb (Bloch) term, and adding it to the loss function is illuminating. Applied without restric-tion, it diverges near the peak—over-correcting the cold Bragg peak by tens of percent—because the higher-order 

Zb expansion fails there as the stopping number becomes small. Regularized instead by a velocity-based (rather than medium-based) cutoff that vanishes at the cold-matter peaks, it leaves the cold C, Al, Ag, and Au stopping unchanged while reducing the higher-velocity plasma-peak stopping by about 7% –roughly a quarter of the way to the T-matrix; this correction is included in the released model. The remainder—the deepest nonper-turbative regime, right at the peak where the series ceases to converge—is intrinsic, which is precisely why a fully nonperturbative treatment is required there and why the peak is the decisive experimental target. The regularized correction thus recovers the leading nonperturbative-Zb

physics at a small fraction of the cost of a T-matrix, while marking the boundary beyond which only measurement, or full resummation, can go. This is consistent with the average-atom overshoot near the peak noted in Sec. V and with the practical-sufficiency argument of Sec. VII: the residual peak discrepancy is real but, for integrated energy deposition, smaller than the smearing imposed by any realistic source. The next generation of measurements can extend this benchmarking across the parameter space. Be-yond the heavy-ion-plus-laser configuration at GSI, laser-driven ion sources at high-repetition-rate facilities— ELI/ELIMAIA, CLPU/VEGA, and the U.S. warm-dense-matter program—offer compact pump-and-probe access to a broad range of conditions, supported by the isochronous energy-selecting diagnostics now under de-velopment 54 . These platforms carry the caveat raised in Sec. IX: a laser-accelerated beam is not as cleanly isolated as a traditional accelerated beam, so careful characterization of the accelerating fields and electron transport—together with rad-hydro reconstruction of the target and a plasma charge-state model—is a prerequi-site for an unambiguous stopping measurement. The e-RPA/LDA model supplies the efficient, physics-based prediction across this space; the experiments, in turn, 19 would determine whether its peak-region corrections close the gap to the nonperturbative result and tighten the constraint at the conditions of inertial-fusion ignition.  

> IX. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK

We have reported a wide-range electronic stopping power model based on the random-phase-approximation (RPA) dielectric response of Wang et al. 32 and the local-density approximation (LDA) with electron-density dis-tributions computed in an average-atom model using the Flexible Atomic Code (FAC). The cold-matter accuracy has been substantially improved by extensions to the RPA: a strong-collision (binary-collision) correction for large momentum transfer 36 , a static local-field correc-tion 37 , an electron-binding correction, and the higher-order Barkas and Bloch terms, the latter regularized by a velocity cutoff so it recovers the leading nonpertur-bative projectile-charge physics in plasmas without dis-turbing the cold-matter fits. We have further added a nuclear/ionic (elastic ion–ion) stopping term 45 and a band-gap correction for cold insulators, yielding a com-plete, self-consistent total stopping power that is con-tinuous from cold solids through warm dense matter to fusion plasmas. The model was validated against the NIST PSTAR and IAEA databases for elements and com-pounds, the charged-particle transport-workshop and TD-DFT benchmarks, and the first light-ion plasma-stopping measurements; the e-RPA corrections reduce the mean deviation from the cold databases from about 12% (RPA) to 4%, while the model remains computation-ally efficient and applicable to high-Z targets at arbitrary ionization and degeneracy. The model is released as the open-source package 

dedx-erpa , available on GitHub at https://github. com/dedx-erpa/dedx , with tabulated proton stopping powers and ranges for cold targets in the data/ subdirec-tory; the package contents, command-line interface, and output formats are documented in the Appendix A. We plan to submit the e-RPA/LDA package to the PlasmaPy developers as an Affiliated Package, in order to increase its visibility within the plasma-physics community. Several extensions are planned. We have had requests to incorporate the model into a version of PRISM’s Spect3D that imports plasma conditions from hydrody-namic simulations to facilitate experimental data analysis and to implement it as an efficient ion-energy-deposition module in radiation-hydrodynamics and hybrid-PIC Monte-Carlo codes—PRISM’s HELIOS-CR would be a natural test bed, and both the WARP-X (LBNL/LLNL) and Triforce (UR/LLE) developers have expressed in-terest. The Sandia analysis of the rad-hydrodynamics relied on hydrocode reconstructions of the time-varying target (Sec. V), and modern laser-plasma stopping ex-periments likewise derive their plasma conditions from two-dimensional radiation-hydrodynamics simulations 50 ,so a rad hydro re-analysis of the Young and Olsen experiments—and forward-modeling of the next gener-ation of ultrashort-pulse-laser platforms—would tighten the inferred conditions and sharpen the comparison with the model. Supporting the renewed interest in heavy-ion drivers for inertial fusion energy, which is discussed in the IFE Basic Needs Workshop Report 8, will require an open-source model for the projectile charge state. In cold matter the charge state evolution of a fast ion is well described by codes such as ETACHA 52 ; in a plasma, where strong beam-plasma coupling drives nonequilib-rium charge states and the projectile charge enters the stopping quadratically, the distribution must be evolved through the time-varying conditions, as demonstrated for laser-generated plasmas by Cayzac et al. 50 . Such a model is directly analogous to the collisional-radiative models that FAC already supports, so the necessary infrastruc-ture is in place. The verification-and-validation chain pursued here – cold matter → warm dense matter → hot plasma – makes plain that the principal limitation on stopping-power modeling is now the data, not the models. We there-fore close with a call for new measurements across all three regimes. In normal matter, the decline in published stopping data since 2015 2 has left unresolved conflicts be-tween datasets and large gaps in projectile–target-energy coverage; high-quality measurements are needed both to settle those conflicts and to guard against the propaga-tion of systematic errors that arises when semi-empirical codes are used to analyze the very experiments that calibrate them. In warm dense matter, the data re-main sparsest precisely where the models diverge most— near the Bragg peak, at vp/v th ≲ 10 and Γ ∼ 0.1–10 (Fig. 12)—the region that governs ion-beam heating and the cold-fuel leg of fusion deposition, and the region the historic NRL and Sandia data already begin to populate. And in the high-energy-density regime, the achievement of ignition 18 now provides a highly diagnosed platform for constraining the temperature dependence of alpha stopping in dense DT, complementing the dedicated low-Z plasma-stopping experiments underway at facilities in the US, Europe, and China. The emerging generation of high-repetition-rate laser and pulsed-power facilities is well suited to this task: by accumulating many shots, they can build the statis-tics needed to map stopping power across temperature, density, and ionization and to fill the underused low-

vp/v th region of the parameter space. This advantage is greatest for normal matter, where the target is static and need not be replaced or regenerated between shots: a high-repetition-rate beam can accumulate large num-bers of measurements on a single sample under identical conditions, directly reducing the database scatter that is widest at the Bragg peak (Sec. IV)—whereas for a plasma target each shot must recreate and re-diagnose the transient state, so repetition rate buys reproducibil-ity and averaging rather than free statistics. However, we add caution, drawn from the same light-ion-fusion experi-ence that motivates this work. Ultrashort-pulse-laser ion 20 sources are not as cleanly isolated as a traditional acceler-ated beam: the accelerating sheath fields and the accom-panying energetic electrons can co-propagate with—and outrun—the ions, so that the target may be heated, pre-ionized, or otherwise perturbed by agents other than the ion beam whose stopping is being measured. Extracting an unambiguous stopping power on such platforms there-fore requires careful characterization of these fields and of the electron transport, or experimental geometries that separate the diagnostic ion from its own source. Tradi-tional accelerators and pulsed-power-driven ion beams, which deliver a comparatively clean and well-isolated probe, retain a distinct and complementary value for this purpose. Together with the open-source release of our model, we hope this work encourages both new experi-ments in these regimes and a quantitative re-examination of the existing data.  

> X. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was partially supported by the U.S. Depart-ment of Energy, Office of Science, Fusion Energy Sciences (FES) under Award Number DE-SC0022112. We thank Sophia Malko, Luca Volpe, Johan Frenje, and Will Fox for discussions about stopping power experiments. The authors also thank Suxing Hu for discussions about DFT and modifications to AA for compound materials and Marcus Borscz for sharing comparisons with modified Lee More and BPS. The authors acknowledge the use of An-thropic’s Claude as a coding, analysis, and manuscript-preparation assistant under the authors’ direction; the authors verified all outputs and take full responsibility for the content. 

> Appendix A: Open-source code: contents and usage

The e-RPA/LDA electronic model, together with the nuclear/ionic and cold-insulator band-gap ex-tensions, is implemented in the open-source pack-age dedx-erpa , available at https://github.com/ dedx-erpa/dedx . This appendix reproduces the pack-age documentation: contents, installation, command-line interface, and output formats. The package is free soft-ware, distributed under the GNU General Public License, version 3 (GPLv3); the full license text is in the reposi-tory’s LICENSE file. Users are free to run, study, modify, and redistribute the code under the terms of that license, which requires that derivative works also be released un-der the GPL. Because the package builds on the Flexible Atomic Code, itself released under GPLv3, it adopts the same license for consistency and compatibility.  

> 1. Package contents

dief.py : computes the RPA dielectric functions and the stopping power of ions in a uniform electron gas, used to tabulate the stopping numbers on a temperature–density grid ( t##.dat ). 

dedx.f : a Fortran program that convolves the e-RPA stopping numbers with the electron-density distri-bution to produce the stopping power of any atomic species. 

dedx.py : the driver: computes the average-atom electron-density distribution and invokes dedx.f to generate the stopping powers. 

nuclear.py , nuclear gk.py : the nuclear/ionic stop-ping (elastic ion–ion at low temperature; projectile-ion/target-ion Fokker–Planck drag at finite temper-ature; Faussurier et al. 45 ), which adds to the elec-tronic term to give a total stopping power. 

data/ : proton stopping in cold targets for Z = 1– 92 and selected compounds; each material has a sub-directory (named by chemical symbol) hold-ing dedx.dat and plots, with independent reference data in data/refs/ . 

> 2. Installation

The package requires numpy , scipy ≥ 1.14, and matplotlib (see requirements.txt ), plus 

pfac , the Python interface to FAC, installed from the master branch of https://github.com/ flexible-atomic-code (earlier FAC releases are not compatible). After installing FAC, edit the Makefile 

and compile dedx.f with make . 

> 3. Command-line interface

The principal options of dedx.py are 

--zp : projectile atomic number (default 1). 

--zt : target atomic number. 

--zc , --wc : for compounds, comma-separated compo-nent atomic numbers and their number-weights. 

--fc : alternatively, the chemical formula of the com-pound, e.g. Al2O3 .

--d , --t : target mass density (g/cc) and temperature (eV). 

--od : output directory. 

--emin , --emax , --mep : projectile-energy range (MeV) and number of points. 21 

--aa : average-atom mode: 2 runs the AA model to gen-erate the density distribution; 1 reuses a previous AA run; 0 reads an existing density file. 

--mloss : stopping-power mode. Mode 0 uses the ana-lytic RPA fit of Wang et al.; modes 1–4 select bare RPA, +local-field, +strong-collision, and +both corrections; adding 10 includes the Barkas term and 20 the Barkas and Bloch terms (the latter regularized by a velocity cutoff so it vanishes at the cold-matter peaks). The default, mloss=24 

(local-field + strong-collision + Barkas + Bloch, with the bound-electron correction), is the recom-mended mode. 

--mout : if 1, also output the radius-resolved contribution to dE/dx .

4. Output 

A run writes dedx.dat to the output directory. Aheader (lines beginning with #) records the target compo-sition, projectile charge, unit-cell radius rs, electron tem-perature, density, and mean ionization ¯Z; the data sec-tion has three columns: energy per nucleon (MeV), elec-tronic stopping power (10 −15 eV cm 2/atom), and range (mg/cm 2). 

5. Nuclear/ionic stopping 

Adding --nuc =1 computes the nuclear/ionic stopping and writes dedx nuc.dat . The potential is selected with 

--npot (subset of gk , ionsphere , yukawa ; default gk ): the full Gordon–Kim model gk builds the projectile– target interaction from the average-atom bound-plus-free electron density with the complete electron-gas energy and reproduces the cold NIST nuclear stopping, whereas the analytic ionsphere /yukawa potentials screen with free electrons only. The ion temperature is set with --ti 

(default = Te); the finite-Ti Maxwellian average captures the thermal motion of the target ions and the energy-gain regime below the thermalization threshold. The out-put adds per-potential nuclear columns, the total stop-ping, and both the CSDA pathlength and the projected (practical) range obtained from the nuclear momentum-transfer cross section. 

6. Examples and citation 

Representative runs: 

Cold Al: python dedx.py --zt=13 --aa=2 --d=2.7 --t=0.025 --od=ColdAl 

Warm Mylar: python dedx.py --fc=H4C5O2 --aa=2 --d=1.35 --t=10.0 --od=MylarWDM 

Cold Al, total: python dedx.py --zt=13 --d=2.7 --t=0.025 --aa=2 --nuc=1 --npot=gk --od=ColdAl 

The repository also provides validation drivers (nuc test.py , nuc fac compare.py ,

alpha dt verify.py , and others) that reproduce the cold-NIST nuclear comparison, the warm-dense-matter temperature sweep, and the alpha-in-DT crossover. When using the package, please cite the e-RPA elec-tronic model of Wang, Mehlhorn, and MacFarlane 32 , the present work for the corrections and the cold-insulator band-gap treatment, and Faussurier et al. 45 for the nuclear/ionic stopping. 

> 1

M. J. Berger, J.S. Coursey, M.A. Zucker, and J. Chang. (2005), estar, pstar, and astar: Computer programs for calculating stopping-power and range tables for electrons, protons, and he-lium ions (version 1.2.3), June 17, 2026 2005. 

> 2

C. C. Montanari, P. Dimitriou, L. Marian, A. M. P. Mendez, J. P. Peralta, and F. Bivort-Haiek. The iaea electronic stopping power database: Modernization, review, and analysis of the ex-isting experimental data. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms , 551:165336, 2024. 

> 3

J. F. Ziegler, M.D. Ziegler, and U. Littmark. SRIM - The Stop-ping and Range of Ions in Matter , volume 1 of The Stopping and Range of ions in Matter. Pergamon Press, 2013. 

> 4

International Committee for Radiological Units. Icru re-port 49 - stopping power and ranges for protons and alpha particles. https://nds.iaea.org/stopping-legacy/stopping_ 201812/stopping_heli.html .

> 5

Hans.H. Anderson and James.F. Ziegler. HYDROGEN: The Stopping and Ranges of Ions in Matter . Pergamon, 1977. 

> 6

G. S. Fraley, E. J. Linnebur, R. J. Mason, and R. L. Morse. Ther-monuclear burn characteristics of compressed deuterium-tritium microspheres. Physics of Fluids , 17(2):474–489, 1974. 

> 7

A. B. Zylstra and O. A. Hurricane. On alpha-particle transport in inertial fusion. Physics of Plasmas , 26(6):062701, 2019. 

> 8

T. Ma and R. Betti. Inertial fusion energy: Report of the 2022 fusion energy sciences basic research needs workshop, June 21st – 23rd, 2022 2022. 

> 9

D. Casas, M. D. Barriga-Carrasco, and J. Rubio. Evaluation of slowing down of proton and deuteron beams in CH2, LiH, and Al partially ionized plasmas. Physical Review E , 88(3):033102, 2013. 

> 10

S. Malko, W. Cayzac, V. Ospina-Boh´ orquez, et al. Proton stop-ping measurements at low velocity in warm dense carbon. Nature Communications , 13(1):2893, 2022. 

> 11

Benjamin L. Reichelt, Richard D. Petrasso, and Chikang Li. Ef-fects of alpha-ion stopping on ignition and ignition criteria in in-ertial confinement fusion experiments. Physics of Plasmas , 31(1), 2024. 

> 12

M. D. Barriga-Carrasco, J. V´ azquez-Moyano, and F. Chac´ on-Rubio. Calculations on the stopping power of the warm dense matter at the bragg peak. Physics Letters A , 447:128294, 2022. 

> 13

F. C. Young, D. Mosher, S. J. Stephanakis, S. A. Goldstein, and T. A. Mehlhorn. Measurements of enhanced stopping of 1-MeV deuterons in target-ablation plasmas. Physical Review Letters ,49(8):549–553, 1982. 

> 14

J. N. Olsen, T. A. Mehlhorn, J. Maenchen, and D. J. John-son. Enhanced ion stopping powers in high-temperature targets. 

Journal of Applied Physics , 58(8):2958–2967, 1985. 

> 15

S. Atzeni and J. Meyer-ter Vehn. The Physics of Inertial Fusion .Oxford University Press, 2004. 

> 16

Jieru Ren, Zhigang Deng, Wei Qi, Benzheng Chen, Bubo Ma, Xing Wang, Shuai Yin, Jianhua Feng, Wei Liu, Zhongfeng Xu, Dieter H. H. Hoffmann, Shaoyi Wang, Quanping Fan, Bo Cui, 22 

Shukai He, Zhurong Cao, Zongqing Zhao, Leifeng Cao, Yuqiu Gu, Shaoping Zhu, Rui Cheng, Xianming Zhou, Guoqing Xiao, Hongwei Zhao, Yihang Zhang, Zhe Zhang, Yutong Li, Dong Wu, Weimin Zhou, and Yongtao Zhao. Observation of a high degree of stopping for laser-accelerated intense proton beams in dense ionized matter. Nature Communications , 11(1):5157, 2020. 

> 17

J. A. Frenje, P. E. Grabowski, C. K. Li, et al. Measurements of ion stopping around the Bragg peak in high-energy-density plasmas. Physical Review Letters , 122(1):015002, 2019. 

> 18

H. Abu-Shawareb, R. Acree, P. Adams, J. Adams, B. Addis, R. Aden, P. Adrian, B. B Afeyan, M. Aggleton, L. Aghaian, A. Aguirre, D. Aikens, J. Akre, F. Albert, M. Albrecht, B. J Al-bright, J. Albritton, J. Alcala, C. Alday, D. A Alessi, N. Alexan-der, J. Alfonso, N. Alfonso, E. Alger, S. J Ali, Z. A Ali, A. Allen, W. E Alley, P. Amala, P. A Amendt, P. Amick, S. Ammula, C. Amorin, D. J Ampleford, R. W Anderson, T. Anklam, N. An-tipa, B. Appelbe, C. Aracne-Ruddle, E. Araya, T. N Archuleta, M. Arend, P. Arnold, T. Arnold, A. Arsenlis, J. Asay, L. J Atherton, D. Atkinson, R. Atkinson, J. M Auerbach, B. Austin, L. Auyang, A. A S Awwal, N. Aybar, J. Ayers, S. Ayers, T. Ay-ers, S. Azevedo, B. Bachmann, C. A Back, J. Bae, D. S Bai-ley, J. Bailey, T. Baisden, K. L Baker, H. Baldis, D. Barber, M. Barberis, D. Barker, A. Barnes, C. W Barnes, M. A Barrios, C. Barty, I. Bass, S. H Batha, S. H Baxamusa, G. Bazan, J. K Beagle, R. Beale, B. R Beck, J. B Beck, M. Bedzyk, R. G Beeler, R. G Beeler, W. Behrendt, L. Belk, P. Bell, M. Belyaev, J. F Benage, G. Bennett, L. R Benedetti, L. X Benedict, R. L Berger, T. Bernat, L. A Bernstein, B. Berry, L. Bertolini, G. Besenbruch, J. Betcher, R. Bettenhausen, et al. Achievement of target gain larger than unity in an inertial fusion experiment. Physical Re-view Letters , 132(6), 2024. 

> 19

P. E. Grabowski, S. B. Hansen, M. S. Murillo, L. G. Stanton, F. R. Graziani, A. B. Zylstra, S. D. Baalrud, P. Arnault, A. D. Baczewski, L. X. Benedict, C. Blancard, O. Certik, J. Clerouin, L. A. Collins, S. Copeland, A. A. Correa, J. Dai, J. Daligault, M. P. Desjarlais, M. W. C. Dharma-wardana, G. Faussurier, J. Haack, T. Haxhimali, A. Hayes-Sterbenz, Y. Hou, S. X. Hu, D. Jensen, G. Jungman, G. Kagan, D. Kang, J. D. Kress, Q. Ma, M. Marciante, E. Meyer, R. E. Rudd, D. Saumon, L. Shulen-burger, R. Singleton, T. Sjostrom, L. J. Stanek, C. E. Starrett, C. Ticknor, S. Valaitis, J. Venzke, and A. White. Review of the first charged-particle transport coefficient comparison workshop. 

High Energy Density Physics , 37:29, 2020. 

> 20

L. G. Stanek et al. Review of the second charged-particle trans-port coefficient code comparison workshop. Physics of Plasmas ,31, 2024. 

> 21

T. A. Mehlhorn. Intense ion beams for inertial confinement fusion. IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science , 25(6):1336–56, 1997. 

> 22

J. P. Quintenz, J. E. Bailey, K. W. Bieg, D. D. Bloomquist, D. L. Cook, J. T. Crow, R. S. Coats, M. S. Derzon, M. P. Desjarlais, P. L. Dreike, R. A. Gerber, T. W. Hussey, D. J. Johnson, W. A. Johnson, R. P. Kensek, G. W. Kuswa, J. R. Lee, R. J. Leeper, T. R. Lockner, J. E. Maenchen, D. H. McDaniel, P. F. McKay, T. A. Mehlhorn, Jr. Mendel, C. W., L. P. Mix, E. L. Neau, C. L. Olson, T. D. Pointon, A. L. Pregenzer, T. J. Renk, G. E. Rochau, S. E. Rosenthal, C. L. Ruiz, L. X. Schneider, S. A. Slutz, R. W. Stinnett, W. A. Stygar, M. A. Sweeney, F. C. Tisone, B. N. Turman, J. P. VanDevender, and J. R. Woodworth. Status of the pbfa-ii light ion beam fusion program. In Particle Accel-erator Conference, 1989. Accelerator Science and Technology., Proceedings of the 1989 IEEE , pages 752–756 vol.2, 1989. 

> 23

T. A. Mehlhorn. A finite material temperature model for ion en-ergy deposition in ion-driven inertial confinement fusion targets. 

Journal of Applied Physics , 52(11):6522–32, 1981. 

> 24

T. A. Mehlhorn, J. M. Peek, E. J. McGuire, J. N. Olsen, and F. C. Young. Current status of calculations and measurements of ion stopping power in icf plasmas. Journal De Physique , 44(NC-8):39–66, 1983. 

> 25

J. Maenchen, T. A. Mehlhorn, D. F. Wenger, R. J. Leeper, D. J. Johnson, and T. R. Lockner. Intense ion beam k α measurements on pbfa-ii. Review of Scientific Instruments , 59(8):1706–1708, 1988. 

> 26

J. Bailey, A. L. Carlson, G. Chandler, M. S. Derzon, R. J. Dukart, B. A. Hammel, D. J. Johnson, T. R. Lockner, J. Maenchen, E. J. McGuire, T. A. Mehlhorn, W. E. Nelson, L. E. Ruggles, W. A. Stygar, and D. F. Wenger. Observation of k α. x-ray satellites from a target heated by an intense ion beam. Laser and Particle Beams , 8(4):555–562, 1990. 

> 27

G. A. Chandler, J. Aubert, J. Bailey, A. Carlson, D. Derzon, M. Derzon, R. Dukart, R. Humphreys, J. Hunter, D. J. John-son, M. K. Matzen, A. Moats, R. Olson, J. Pantuso, P. Rockett, C. Ruiz, P. Sawyer, J. Torres, and T. Hussey. Icf target diag-nostics on pbfa ii (invited). Review of Scientific Instruments ,63(10):4828–4833, 1992. 

> 28

T. A. Mehlhorn, J. E. Bailey, G. A. Chandler, R. S. Coats, M. E. Cuneo, M. S. Derzon, M. P. Desjarlais, R. J. Dukart, A. B. Filuk, T. A. Haill, H. C. Ives, D. J. Johnson, R. J. Leeper, T. R. Lock-ner, C. W. Mendel, P. R. Menge, L. P. Mix, A. R. Moats, W. B. Moore, T. D. Pointon, J. W. Poukey, J. P. Quintenz, S. E. Rosen-thal, D. Rovang, C. L. Ruiz, S. A. Slutz, W. A. Stygar, and D. F. Wenger. Progress in lithium beam power, divergence, and in-tensity at sandia national laboratories. In High-Power Particle Beams, 1994 10th International Conference on , volume 1, pages 53–56, 1994. 

> 29

M. S. Derzon, G. A. Chandler, R. J. Dukart, D. J. Johnson, R. J. Leeper, M. K. Matzen, E. J. McGuire, T. A. Mehlhorn, A. R. Moats, R. E. Olson, and C. L. Ruiz. Li-beam-heated hohlraum experiments at particle beam fusion accelerator ii. Physical Re-view Letters , 76(3):435–8, 1996. 

> 30

J.J. MacFarlane, P. Wang, J. Bailey, T.A. Mehlhorn, R.J. Dukart, and R.C. Mancini. Analysis of ka line emission from aluminum plasmas created by intense proton beams. In Physi-cal Review E , volume 47, (4), pages 2748–2758. The American Physical Society, 1993. 

> 31

E. J. McGuire. The proton stopping power of aluminum and nickel ions. Journal of Applied Physics , 70(12):7213–7216, 1991. 

> 32

P. Wang, T. A. Mehlhorn, and J. J. MacFarlane. A unified self-consistent model for calculating ion stopping power in ICF plasma. Physics of Plasmas , 5(8):2977–2987, 1998. 

> 33

D. A. Liberman, D. T. Cromer, and J. T. Waber. Relativistic self-consistent field program for atoms and ions. Computer Physics Communications , 2(2):107–113, 1971. 

> 34

G. Maynard and C. Deutsch. Born random phase approxima-tion for ion stopping in an arbitrarily degenerate electron fluid. 

Journal de Physique , 46(7):1113–1122, 1985. 

> 35

M. F. Gu. The flexible atomic code. Canadian Journal of Physics , 86(5):675–689, 2008. 

> 36

G. Zwicknagel, C. Toepffer, and P.-G. Reinhard. Stopping of heavy ions in plasmas at strong coupling. Physics Reports ,309(3):117–208, 1999. 

> 37

S. Ichimaru and K. Utsumi. Analytic expression for the dielectric screening function of strongly coupled electron liquids at metallic and lower densities. Physical Review B , 24(12):7385–7388, 1981. 

> 38

M. P. Desjarlais, J. D. Kress, and L. A. Collins. Electrical conduc-tivity for warm, dense aluminum plasmas and liquids. Physical Review E , 66(2), 2002. Part 2. 

> 39

M. P. Desjarlais. Density-functional calculations of the liquid deuterium hugoniot, reshock, and reverberation timing. Physical Review B , 68(6):8, 2003. 

> 40

M. P. Desjarlais. Density functional calculations of the reflec-tivity of shocked xenon with ionization based gap corrections. 

Contributions to Plasma Physics , 45(3-4):300–304, 2005. 

> 41

A. J. White, L. A. Collins, K. Nichols, and S. X. Hu. Mixed stochastic-deterministic time-dependent density functional the-ory: application to stopping power of warm dense carbon. Jour-nal of Physics: Condensed Matter , 34(17):174001, 2022. 

> 42

H. Esbensen and P. Sigmund. Barkas effect in a dense medium: Stopping power and wake field. Annals of Physics , 201(1):152– 192, 1990. 23 

> 43

Z. H. Levine and S. G. Louie. New model dielectric function and exchange-correlation potential for semiconductors and insulators. 

Physical Review B , 25(10):6310–6316, 1982. 

> 44

A. B. Zylstra, J. A. Frenje, P. E. Grabowski, et al. Measurement of charged-particle stopping in warm dense plasma. Physical Review Letters , 114(21):215002, 2015. 

> 45

G. Faussurier, C. Blancard, and M. Gauthier. Nuclear stop-ping power in warm and hot dense matter. Physics of Plasmas ,20(1):012705, 2013. 

> 46

O. N. Krokhin and V. B. Rozanov. Escape of α particles from a laser-pulse-initiated thermonuclear reaction. Soviet Journal of Quantum Electronics , 2(4):393–394, 1973. 

> 47

Stanley Skupsky. Energy loss of ions moving through high-density matter. Physical Review A , 16(2):727–731, 1977. PRA. 

> 48

Stanley Skupsky. High-density effects on thermonuclear igni-tion for inertially confined fusion. Physical Review Letters ,44(26):1760–1763, 1980. PRL. 

> 49

Marcus Borscz, Thomas A. Mehlhorn, Patrick A. Burr, Igor Mo-rozov, and Sergey Pikuz. Monte carlo simulations of suprather-mal enhancement in advanced nuclear fusion fuels. arXiv e-prints , page arXiv:2604.06769, 2026. 

> 50

W. Cayzac, V. Bagnoud, M. M. Basko, A. Blaˇ zevi´ c, A. Frank, D. O. Gericke, L. Hallo, G. Malka, A. Ortner, An. Tauschwitz, J. Vorberger, and M. Roth. Predictions for the energy loss of light ions in laser-generated plasmas at low and medium velocities. 

Physical Review E , 92(5):053109, 2015. 

> 51

W. Cayzac, A. Frank, A. Ortner, V. Bagnoud, M. M. Basko, S. Bedacht, C. Bl¨ aser, A. Blaˇ zevi´ c, S. Busold, O. Deppert, J. Ding, M. Ehret, P. Fiala, S. Frydrych, D. O. Gericke, L. Hallo, J. Helfrich, D. Jahn, E. Kjartansson, A. Knetsch, D. Kraus, G. Malka, N. W. Neumann, K. P´ epitone, D. Pepler, S. Sander, G. Schaumann, T. Schlegel, N. Schroeter, D. Schu-macher, M. Seibert, An. Tauschwitz, J. Vorberger, F. Wagner, S. Weih, Y. Zobus, and M. Roth. Experimental discrimination of ion stopping models near the bragg peak in highly ionized matter. Nature Communications , 8:15693, 2017. 

> 52

J. P. Rozet, C. St´ ephan, and D. Vernhet. Etacha: a program for calculating charge states at ganil energies. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B , 107(1-4):67–70, 1996. 

> 53

Y. T. Zhao, Y. N. Zhang, R. Cheng, B. He, C. L. Liu, X. M. Zhou, Y. Lei, Y. Y. Wang, J. R. Ren, X. Wang, Y. H. Chen, G. Q. Xiao, S. M. Savin, R. Gavrilin, A. A. Golubev, and D. H. H. Hoffmann. Benchmark experiment to prove the role of projectile excited states upon the ion stopping in plasmas. Physical Review Letters , 126(11):115001, 2021. 

> 54

L. Volpe, T. Cebriano Ram´ ırez, C. S´ anchez S´ anchez, A. Perez, A. Curcio, D. De Luis, G. Gatti, B. Kebladj, S. Khetari, J. A. Perez-Hernandez, and M. D. Rodriguez Frias. A platform for ultra-fast proton probing of matter in extreme conditions. Sen-sors , 24(16):5254, 2024.