Title: Three-dimensional nanodosimetric characterisation of proton track structure

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.29945v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 01:54:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 52

Markdown Content:
1

## Review 

## Prediction of biological radiation effects based on  ionization clusters 

## (nanodosimetry )

Hans Rabus 

Physikalisch -Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), 10587 Berlin, Germany 

Dedicated to  the memory of Bernd Grosswendt †

## Abstract 

This article reviews approaches  that link  the formation of ionization clusters in nanometric 

volumes  to  radiobiological effectiveness. The corresponding models are presented using 

harmonized  terminology and notation. They are categorized into three classes according to the 

most important, often implicit model rationale: (a) models  that use  a nan odosimetric weighting 

factor for biological effectiveness derived from  frequency distributions of  ionization cluster s in a 

single target; (b) models  that account for  the synergistic effects of  pairs of  ionization clusters 

formed in  different  targets ; (c) models  that a ccount for  ‘macroscopic’ situations  involving  many 

nanometric targets and  derive  radiation quantities from  the  particle fluence. Further  conceptual 

differences between the models and their  underlying  assumptions  are discussed , such as  the 

fact  that some models are mechanistic while others only aim  to  elucidat e correlations. 

Eventually, an attempt is made to  identify  the key open questions in th is  field that still need to be 

addressed. 

Keywords : nanodosimetry, track structure,  biological effectiveness 

## 1 Introduction 

Nanodosimetry  is concerned  with the  quantitative description of the  stochastic pattern of 

radiation interaction , known as  the track structure , in terms  of clusters  of ionizations in targets 

with  nanometric dimensions  [1 –4] . The development of th is  field  was prompted by evidence  that 

clustering of lesions within short segments of the  deoxyribonucleic  acid (DNA) molecule 

determines  radiobiological effectiveness  [5 –7] . The  first detectors for measuring  particle track 

structure  were developed 50 years ago  [8] . The  foundations for  the  present state -of -the -art 

nanodosimetric gas counters were  established  in the late 1990s  [9 –11]  leading  to  parallel 

developments  of  nanodosimeters  by  the Italian  National Institute for Nuclear Physics  (INFN) in 

Legnaro,  Italy  [12] , the  Polish Nuclear Research Center  (NCBJ ) in Swierk,  Poland  [13] , and  a

collaboration of Loma Linda University (LLU), USA and the Weizmann Institute of Science (WIS) ,

Israel  [14] . These detectors simulate a single nanometric target volume in tissue or liquid water 

based on  the  principle of  density and material scaling  [15]  and  are the established reference 

instruments for nanodosimetry . However , the focus of development in th is a re a has shifted 

to wards  the exploration of  detectors with  potential track imaging capabilities  [16 –18]  or  more 

compact detector designs  [19 –21] .2

The development of gas -counter nanodosimeters was accompanied by the oretical 

investigations  into ionization cluster  (IC)  formation  [22,23]  and  the  development  of  a dedicated 

track -structure simulation  code  [24] , which was later named  PTra  (PTB track structure code)  [25] .

In contrast to  parallel  developments of  other  track -structure codes such as  KURBUC  (Kyushu 

University and Radio -biology Unit Code)  [26,27]  and PARTRAC  [28] , PTra  focused on  numerical 

simulation of the nanodosimetric detectors and  their performance. Later , it was also  employed 

to  study the  significance  of differences between cross sections of liquid water  and DNA for 

predict ing  IC s in DNA  [29] . The  general -purpose  Monte Carlo codes Geant4  and PHITS  were 

extended to also enable t rack -structure simulation s with their variants Geant4 -DNA  [30 –33]  and 

PHITS -ets  [34] , respectively .

This article reviews  models proposed  to  predict  the  biological effectiveness of radiation from 

nanodosimetric  features  of  the  particle track structure . Initial  attempts  to  achiev e this  objective 

were already  made i n parallel  with  the  development of  nanodosimetric gas -counter  detector s

[35] . Since then , a var iety of  approaches  have been  put forth , culminat ing  in the  recent ly proposed 

framework  concept by  Faddegon et al.  for the use of nanodosimetric quantities in treatment 

planning for hadron therapy  [36] .

In this review, the models are categorized  into three different classes . One class  comprise s

models that estimate  the relative biological effectiveness of different radiation  types from 

nanodosimetric parameters  that  relat e to a single nanometric target . The second class 

comprise s model s that account for  the correlated occurrence of ionization clusters in  distinct 

target volumes . The third class  pertains  to  models  that  explicitly  utilize  particle fluence  and 

macroscopic averages of  the frequency of  ionization cluster s. An example is  the new concept of 

cluster dose  [36] . The majority  of these models  are  predicated  on  nanodosimetric  outcomes  from 

track structure simulations, wh ile  a few  models in  the first class  are  based  on experimental data. 

Following a  concise  outline  of  nanodosimetry in Section 2 , the  models  belonging to  the  three 

classes  are described in Sections 3 to 5 . The objective of this review is to  provide  an o verview of 

the  proposed  approaches  and to present them  in a  harmonized  way.  For this reason , the  notation 

used  in this work  deviates  from that used in the  articles reviewed  in  certain  cases . In  instances 

where this variant notation  might  lead to confusion,  this is explicitly noted in f ootnotes .

## 2 The concepts of nanodosimetry 

For the sake of clarity , it is  worth  to reiterate  that  the term  “nanodosimetry ,”  utilized  in this 

review , pertains  to  the study of the formation of ionization clusters in nanometric volumes  and 

must be discerned  from  its application in different context.  For instance,  for microdosimetry in 

nanometric target volumes  [37,38]  or the  occasionally observed  mis conception  that it refers to 

the  measurement of absorbed dose in nanometric volumes .

Comprehensive r eviews of the  fundamental  principles  of nanodosimetry  can be found in the 

literature  [1,3,4] , and  only the key features are  reiterated  here . Conceptually , a nanodosimetric 

measurement  constitutes  a coincidence experiment as illustrated in  Fig.  1: A primary particle 

moving along the black dashed line passes the target volume (label ed  ‘site’) and is recorded by a 

primary particle detector. The black circles mark the points at which ionizing interactions by the 

primary particle or its secondary electrons occur. The number of ionizations produced in the 

target volume is  called  the ionization cluster size  (ICS)  𝜈  of this primary particle event. 3

The relative frequency  fν of events producing an  IC  of size  𝜈  in an experiment or a simulation is 

an estimate of the probability  Pν of  the  generation of an  IC  of size  𝜈 . This probability pertains to  a

primary particle of this type and energy passing the site with  a given impact parameter. T he 

impact parameter  is  defined by the offset between  the  parallel s to  the particle trajectory  passing 

the site centrally  (dot -dashed line in  Fig.  1) and the  center of  primary particle detector  (dashed 

line in  Fig.  1), respectively . The probability distribution of the different possible values of cluster 

size  𝜈  is a characteristic of the radiation quality (specified by particle type and energy) and 

depends on the material, size and shape of the target.           

> Fig. 1:Illustration of a nanodosimetric event in a spherical site passed by a track at a given impact
> parameter. The black dots represent points with ionizing interactions. The ionizations produced in th e
> volume of th is site are scored in coincidence with the detection of a passing primary particle. The annulus
> represents the area covered by primary particle detectors corresponding to the same impact parameter. 1

With the coincidence setup shown in  Fig.  1, the possible values of  𝜈  include 0,  which means 

no ionization in the target.  Cases of no ionization or only a single ionization evidently do not 

correspond to ionization clustering in  a strict sense. 

The nanodosimeters developed so far determine the ICS by counting the number of ion izations 

produced in a dilute gas. Different approaches have been taken to define the actual target volume 

in the gas  [2] , and the equivalence of the ICS distributions from these macroscopic gas targets to 

targets in tissue or water  of nanometric dimensions  relies on a scaling relation. This scaling 

relation (discussed in more detail in Appendix A)  accounts for  density and material properties  and 

sometimes also  the detection efficiency  [15,39 –42] . The validity of the scaling between materials 

was experimentally  confirmed  for several operating gases in a nanodosimeter  [43,44] .

As an  illustration of the scaling principle , Fig.  2 presents  simulated IC distributions for an alpha 

particle of 4.6  MeV energy traveling in water (boxes), nitrogen (circles), and propane (diamonds) 

traversing a cylindrical target of equal diameter and height centrally. The target in water has a 

diameter  𝐷  of 4  nm and a mass density  𝜌  of 1  g/cm³, corresponding to  𝐷𝜌  = 0.4  mg/cm². Similar 

IC distributions are obtained with  𝐷𝜌  values of 0.58 mg/cm² for nitrogen and 0.32 mg/cm² for 

propane.      

> 1Fig. 1is reprinted from Radiation Physics and Chemistry 232, H. Rabus and L. Thomas, On a revised
> concept of an event that allows linking nanodosimetry and microdosimetry in nanometric sites with
> macroscopic dosimetry, 112640, Copyright (2025), with permission from Elsevier.

4           

> Fig. 2:Simulated ionization cluster size distributions for a 4.6 MeV alpha particle passing through the center
> of a cylindrical target in a direction perpendicular to the cylinder’s axis. In the case of liquid water, the
> cylinder’s height and diameter 𝐷 were set to 4 nm. To obtain the same mean ionization cluster size in the
> sensitive volume, the mass per unit area 𝐷𝜌 of nitrogen and propane was 0.58 mg/cm 2and 0.32 mg/cm 2,
> respectively, where 𝜌 denotes the mass density. 2

The  diameters of  target volumes in liquid water simulated  by existing nanodosimeters range 

between  approximately  2 nm and 20  nm . The resulting  measured  ICS  distributions are different ,

with the mean cluster size essentially proportional  to the site diameter and the instrumental 

detection efficiency . However,  as  was  demonstrated  by Conte et al.  [45]  and  corroborated  by 

Miete lska et al.  [46] , the complementary cumulative cluster probabilities  𝐹 𝑘  measured by 

different nanodosimeters  plotted as  a function of the corresponding mean  IC  size  𝑀 1 fall on the 

same curves  (see  Supplementary Fig.  1,  which shows the case of  𝐹 2).  As discussed in Section  3.3 ,

these curves  can even be related to radiobiological cross -sections  [47] . The complementary 

cumulative probabilities are obtained from the probabilit ies  𝑃 𝜈  of cluster size  𝜈  by  using  Eq.  (1).

𝐹 𝑘  = ∑ 𝑃 𝜈 

> 𝜈 ≥𝑘

(1)

The mean cluster size is the first moment of the ICS distribution , where the moments  𝑀 𝑘  are 

defined by Eq.  (2).

𝑀 𝑘  = ∑ 𝜈 𝑘 𝑃 𝜈 

> 𝜈

(2)

While early nanodosimetric experiments used  only  setup s in which the primary particle 

traversed the target volume,  measu ring  ICS  distribution s for primary particles  passing the target 

at an  impact parameter  as shown in  Fig.  1 offers  further  insight . One example is  that the 

conditional ICS distribution s 𝑃 𝜈 

> 𝑐

, which are defined  for  𝜈  ≥ 1 by  Eq.  (3) were found to be almost 

invariant in a certain range of impact parameters  [48,49] .

𝑃 𝜈  

> 𝑐

= 𝑃 𝜈 

𝐹 1

= 𝑃 𝜈 

1 − 𝑃 0

(3)      

> 2Fig. 2is reprinted from Radiation Measurements 46 (9), H. Nettelbeck and H. Rabus, Nanodosimetry: The
> missing link between radiobiology and radiation physics? 893 -897, Copyright (2011), with permission from
> Elsevier.

5

As was  demonstrated  by Pietrzak et al , conditional ICS distributions can also be derived from 

nanodosimetric measurements performed without a primary particle detector  [50] . However , this 

faces  challenges  such as  discriminating against  multiple events  that  contribut e to the same 

measurement. 

Some authors  [51 –54]  considered  conditional ICS distributions  𝑃 𝜈  

> 𝑐 2

defined  for  𝜈  ≥ 2 by Eq.  (4)

𝑃 𝜈  

> 𝑐 2

= 𝑃 𝜈 

𝐹 2

= 𝑃 𝜈 

1 − 𝑃 0 − 𝑃 1

(4)

This second type of conditional ICS distribution  focuses  on target s receiving true ionization 

clusters (i.e., more than one ionization) . T he first type  pertains  to a n event concept  similar  to  that 

employed  in microdosimetry  [55] .

While  simulation studies  of  track structure  frequently  use  configurations  analogous  to  those 

of  experimental setup s, Selva et al.  [56]  pointed out that  impact parameters at which the  primary 

particle intersects  a spherical  target can also be realized by  using the ion trajectory as reference 

and placing a multitude of targets  around it with cylinder -radial distances less  than  or equal  to 

their diameter.  The same philosophy was  followed  by  Braunroth et al.  [57 –60]  to  study the 

variation of  conditional  ICS distributions  with impact parameter  over the full range of  impact 

parameters generating ICs in the target.  (Earlier work by Rabus et al.  [61,62]  employed  a nearly 

identical  sampling approach  but  only considered impact parameters up to 100  nm.) 

Consequently, authentic  broad beam conditions  can be realized that are more general than those 

used in  experiments or  some  simulation  studies , in which  the beam  cross -section  matche d the 

target cross -section al are a [42]  or the beam  diameter  was  about  double  [63]  or  three to  five times 

[49,64,65]  the target ’s  diameter .

The paradigm shift towards a track -centered view of nanodosimetry  was first utilized in a  study 

by  Alexander et al.  [66]  in which  nanodosimetric frequency distributions  were scored  with  a

multitude of  targets distributed around a particle trajectory . This is, however,  essentially 

equivalent to  considering a single target and a beam  centered on the target having the same  cross 

section  as the  region around a particle trajectory within which targets are placed  [55] . In contrast 

to  approach es  that  utilize  both an extended beam and a spatial distribution  of targets  [52,67] ,

track -centered approaches allow  investigat ing  the influence of different impact parameters on 

the final  ICS distribution. 

In any case, it  is imperative to  underst and  that  simulation and measurement results are always 

conditional on the irradiation geometry used . This applies  especially  to the  probability  of  clusters 

of size zero , which  strongly depends on the beam size . The reason for this is that  the probability 

of ionizations  in a target decreases with  increasing  beam size , so that the probability of no 

ionization increases . Conversely , conditional ICS distributi ons may  be expected to be less 

dependent  on beam size  since  the absolute number of ICs  per unit path of the primary particle 

saturates  for  all  𝜈  ≥ 1 as  the beam diameter increases. 

As posited in  a generic model  proposed by the BioQu aRT (Biologically weighted  quantities for 

radiotherapy) project  [68]  and subsequent  independent  studies  [69] , there is the possibility  that 

correlated ICs  play a role for  the  effectiveness  of  ionizing radiation . In addition to  the  develop ment 

of  nanodosimetric detectors for  the  spatial imaging of particle track  segments  [16,70,17] , where 

such information would be obtained comprehensively,  experimental studies have also been 

conducted on the correlations of ionization clusters in two targets in proximity  [64,65,71] .

The majority of  nanodosimetric experiments were conducted under conditions of a  well -

defined  ion beam quality, i.e., ion type, charge state , and kinetic energy.  In a  recent  proof -of -6

principle investigation,  a nanodosimeter was operated  behind an absorber hit by a  clinical carbon 

ion beam  [72] , where  data analysis becomes more involved owing to the  complex mixed radiation 

field  [73] . However , such  mixed fields are typical of practical applications of ion beams in  the 

domain of  radiotherapy. 

This  necessitates  an extension  of nanodosimetric concepts . In the  context  of the BioQuaRT 

project,  quantities defined as weighted averag es  over many targets  distributed  in  volume s of 

micromet ric dimensions  corresponding to biological cells or cell nuclei  were studied  [74] .

Ramos -Ménde z et al.  [52]  have  generalized  th is  concept to arbitrary  volumes , such as  voxels used 

for treatment planning . In essence,  for  a nanodosimetric  quantity  𝑄 , the  fluence -weighted and 

dose -weighted averages , 𝑄 ̅𝛷 and  𝑄 ̅𝐷 , are  concept ually  defined by Eqs.  (5) and  (6), respectively .

𝑄 ̅𝛷  = ∑ ∫ 𝑄 (𝐸 , 𝑝 )𝛷 𝐸 

> 𝑝

(𝐸 )𝑑𝐸 𝑝 

∑ ∫ 𝛷 𝐸 

> 𝑝

(𝐸 )𝑑𝐸 𝑝 

(5)

𝑄 ̅𝐷  = ∑ ∫ 𝑄 (𝐸 , 𝑝 )𝛷 𝐸 

> 𝑝

(𝐸 )𝑆 𝑝 (𝐸 )𝑑𝐸 𝑝 

∑ ∫ 𝛷 𝐸 

> 𝑝

(𝐸 )𝑆 𝑝 (𝐸 )𝑑𝐸 𝑝 

(6)

In Eqs.  (5) and  (6), 𝑝  denotes the type of (charged) particle and  𝑄 𝑝 (𝐸 ) is the value of the 

nanodosimetric quantity produced in a considered target by a particle of type  𝑝  and energy  𝐸 , 𝛷 𝐸 

> 𝑝

is the spectral particle fluence of particles of type  𝑝  in the volume considered for averaging, and 

𝑆 𝑝  is the stopping power of the material in the voxel for a particle of type  𝑝  and energy  𝐸 .

It  is important to acknowledge  that the definitions provided by Eqs.  (5) and  (6) are  consistent 

with the work of Dai et al.  [53] . Alexander et al.  [74]  used in their Eq.  (7) the arithmetic mean of 

tracks for  the purpose of  fluence averaging . However, this  is not exactly the same as  fluence 

averaging . Ramos -Mendez et al.  [52]  considered imparted energy ( termed  “deposited energy ”)

instead of dose and omitted the summation over particle type in the denominator in their Eqs.  (1) 

and (2) . Additionally, they  did not explicitly  note  the dependence o f the contributions to 

accumulated track length and energy imparted on the particle type  in their formulae .

The  practical  evaluation of Eqs.  (5) and  (6) follows  a t hree -step procedure. In the first step,  the 

nanodos imetric  quantities , 𝑄 𝑝 (𝐸 ), are determined by performing  track structure  simulations  for 

a set of relevant particle types  and energies.  Subsequently , interpolating functions of the energy 

dependence  of  𝑄 𝑝 (𝐸 ) are determined  for each  distinct  particle type . In the  final  step , volume -

averaged fluences of  pertinent  particles and energies are obtained  through  condensed -history 

simulations . Subsequently,  the integrals are  estimated  through the  summation over energy bins. 

Alexander et al.  [66]  determined p arameterizations  of the energy dependence of some 

nanodosimetric quantities  in a limited energy range  for protons and carbon ions  for targets 

randomly placed around a particle track within a  cubic volume of 1  μm side.  A far m ore 

comprehensive  database was determined by Ramos -Méndez et al.  [52] , who employed  a

multitude of targets  within  a cylinder simulating a  segment of a chromatin fiber. In both cases, 

the nanometric targets were cylinders  with a diameter of 2.3 nm  and  a height of 3.4 nm, 

corresponding to a DNA segment of 10 base pairs. Schwarze et al.  [75]  used the scoring approach 

of  [57]  using cylinder shell segments of the same volume as these cylinders  and scoring all ICs 

produced by the tracks. 

The  volume averaging was done by  Alexander et al.  [66]  in micrometric volumes representing a 

cell  nucleus.  The other aforementioned studies and  those related to the cluster dose concept 

implicitly considered cuboid -shaped  voxels  as used in treatment planning  [36,52,75] . In contrast, 

Dai et al. considered cylinder shells  with outer dimensions  corresponding to  a decrease of the 7

absorbed  dose  to  50  %, 10  %, 1  %, and 0.1  % of  that  at the  beam  axis  of a circular beam  with a 

diameter of  4 mm  [53] .

Another  modified nanodosimetric quantity  was introduced by  Casiraghi and Schulte  [67] ,

namely the  biologically effective mean ICS  per voxel  defined  according to Eq.  (7):

𝑀 1 

> 𝑏𝑖𝑜

= ∑ 𝜈 𝑃 𝜈 

> 10
> 𝜈 =2

∑ 𝑃 𝜈 

> 10
> 𝜈 =2

(7)

The  𝑃 𝜈  appearing  in  Eq.  (7) were  the  average  probabilities of  ICs formed in  cylindrical targets 

with a diameter of  2 nm  and height  of 16  nm , produced  by proton and carbon ion  pencil beams 

with a two -dimensional Gaussian profile of 3  nm standard deviation.  The averag e was calculated 

over  target cylinders  contained within  a regular two -dimensional array of 10 4×10 4 cylinders  with a 

height and diameter of 500 nm . Within each  of these  scoring  cylinders , 10 4 target cylinders were 

randomly placed . In addition to the biologically effective mean ICS , Casiraghi and Schulte  [67] 

also considered  the yield of  small clusters (ICS of 2 or 3) and the yield of large clusters (ICS 

between 4 and 10)  per voxel and per pencil beam.  Using  the  definition  proposed by Yang et al.  [76] 

for conditional ICS probabilities  (Eq.  (8)), these quantities would be denoted as  𝐹 2−3 and  𝐹 4−10 .

𝐹 𝑎 −𝑏  = ∑ 𝑃 𝜈 

> 𝑏
> 𝜈 =𝑎

; 𝐹 𝑎 −𝑏  

> 𝑐

= ∑ 𝑃 𝜈 

> 𝑐
> 𝑏
> 𝜈 =𝑎

(8)

Rabus et al.  [61]  and Braunroth et al.  [57]  determined the radial dependence of the frequency 

distribution of ICs around segments of proton trajectories  and proposed the concept of the 

effective track cross section (ETCS) . The ETCS i s defined as the two -dimensional  integral of the 

probability of a nanometric target receiving an ICS of given properties , e.g. , at least  𝑘  ionizations 

in the cluster , in a plane perpendicular to the primary particle trajectory.  The  ETCS depends on 

the radiation quality and  the target dimensions , but  was found to be  relatively in sensitive to the 

target  shape  [57] . The ETCS  can be interpreted as the ratio of the frequency of ionization clusters 

in nanometric sites to the fluence of primary particles . Consequently, it  provides  the basis  for the 

definition of  a nanodosimetric  analog  to  the microdosimetric  concept  of an  event  [55] .

## 3 RBE estimation from  ionization cluster s in a single target 

## 3.1  The approach of  Grosswendt  considering a s ingle target and direct effects 

The fundamental model assumption s of the approach  developed by Grosswendt in several 

publications  [42,77,78]  are  as follows : 1. T he yield of  DNA  single -strand  breaks ( SSBs ) produced 

by a  specific  type of radiation  is  proportional to the probability  𝑃 1 of an ICS of  𝜈  = 1 in a 

nanometric  cylindrical target  volume . 2.  The yield of  DNA  double -strand  breaks is proportional to 

the complementary cumulative probability  𝐹 2 of  generat ing  an ICS with  𝜈  ≥ 2 in  the same target 

volume. The dimensions of this volume  are  implicit  model parameters, and different choices were 

made  at  different st ages  of the model development. 

In  the initial study , the  cylindrical volume  had  a diameter and height of 2 nm  and  was irradiated 

by  a circular  monoenergetic  electron  beam  of  2 nm in diameter  [77] . The  initial energies  ranged 

from  12 eV  to  100 keV . In addition to the ICS distribution , the mean energy imparted in the 

cylinder , Δ𝐸  , was  also  determined in the simulations.  (The  aforementioned  paper does not 

provide  these details, but it  can be reasonably inferred  that  a planar electron source  in contact 

with  the target cylinder was used and that  the scored energy  encompassed  energy deposits from 

ionizations, electronic excitations , and stopping  electrons.)  The yields of SSBs and DSBs,  𝐺 𝑆𝑆𝐵 8

and  𝐺 𝐷𝑆𝐵  , were then estimated by  utilizing  Eq.  (9), where  𝑐 1 and  𝑐 2 represent  dimensionless 

parameters. 

𝐺 𝑆𝑆𝐵  = 𝑐 1

𝑃 1

∆𝐸  ; 𝐺 𝐷𝑆𝐵  = 𝑐 2

𝐹 2

∆𝐸  (9)

This was motivated by the fact  that yields of DNA strand breaks  are generally quantified as  the 

ratio of the  number  of breaks  to the product of  absorbed  dose and mass of  irradiated  DNA . If the 

dose is  uniform  in the  part of the  irradiated  region containing DNA, the denominator of this ratio 

is the  expectation of the  energy imparted to DNA. 

Although  not explicitly determined, the parameters  𝑐 1 and  𝑐 2 we re  im plicitly determined by 

comparing the predictions according to Eq.  (9) with results obtained by the PARTRAC code  [79] 

requiring a match at the highest  electron energy . For SSBs this scaling  produced agreement at 

energies  above 8  keV , where as for DSBs up to roughly 10  % discrepanc ies  were found in this 

energy range. Overall , the data from Eq.  (9) gave a comparable  qualitative  energy  dependence  as 

the PARTRAC data , while  the absolute  values differed by up to a factor of almost 2 for SSBs and 

almost 3 for DSBs. 

A c omparison of the  ratio of the yields for DSBs to that of SSBs  revealed  up to a factor of  4

higher values than obtained with PARTRAC , with experimental data  [80]  (available only at a few 

energy points)  falling  in between the  two predictions.  In addition, a comparison was presented 

between the energy dependence of  𝐹 2 and  the bio -effect cross -section  data of Simmons and 

Watt  [81] , where a scaling factor was  once again  applied  to  match  the data at an electron energy 

of 150 eV.  This comparison showed  agreement  with respect to the trend ; the absolute  deviations 

remained below  several 10  % in many cases , but  there were also instances of  up to a factor of 3 

di screpancy .

In further development of the approach  [42,78] , the size of the cylindrical target was set to a 

diameter of 2.3  nm and a height of 3.4  nm , corresponding to a segment of 10 base pairs in DNA in 

its B -type  configuration  [82] . This choice implicitly introduc ed a mechanistic model assumption ,

namely that nanodosimetric quantities relate to direct  radiation  effects in the DNA , thus 

neglecting indirect damage by radiolytic species.  For DSB induction, this can be expected to 

provide a good approximation , since  the  radical species undergo Brownian motion so that 

concurrent arrival of different  species at the same short DNA segment and reactions  forming 

strand breaks  may be  expected to be of low probability. 

A c omparison  of the SSB and DSB yields  from electrons  with results from PARTRAC  again 

yielded  the same qualitative energy dependence , with  agreement  for energies of 8  keV or higher 

for both yields  [42] . The discrepancies  observed  at smaller electron energies were still by up to a 

factor of two for SSBs . Furthermore , the ratio of the maximum yields predicted  according to Eq. 

(9) and those from PARTRAC  was  reduced to  a factor of about 1.7.  When the  scaling factor s 𝑐 1

and  𝑐 2 for the  nanodosimetric prediction s according to Eq.  (9) were  determined  by comparison 

with the yield s obtained with PARTRAC for 220  kV x -rays  [83] , about 14  % higher  values  than  with 

PARTRAC  were  obtained for the SSB yield at high electron energies  and almost a factor of two 

difference  to data reported by Nikjoo et al.  [84] . For the ratio of DSB to SSB yields , a factor of four 

higher  maximal value w as  obtained  compared with PARTRAC  [78] .

For monoenergetic protons and alpha particles  in linear energy transfer (LET)  ranges  between 

0.4  keV/μm and 30  keV/μm and between  about 9  keV/ μm and 170  keV/μm, respectively,  a peak 

in the LET dependence was found  at abou t 50 keV/μm  for the estimate from Eq.  (9) [78] . The 9

findings  from PARTRAC  [83,85]  and  Nikjoo et al.  [86]  indicated  this peak to appear at about 

150  keV/μm , a conclusion  that is corroborated  by experimental studies  [87] . A comparison  with 

the corresponding data from PARTRAC and Nikjoo et al. for the ratio  𝑅 𝑑𝑠  of DSB to SSB  yields 

showed that  a comparable LET dependence was obtained with the nanodosimetric estimator 

given by  Eq . (10 ).

𝑅 𝑑𝑠  = 𝑐 3

𝑀 2

𝑀 1

(10 )

The value of the proportionality constant  𝑐 3 was obtained by  requiring a  match with the  yield ratio 

obtained by PARTRAC for protons of 20  MeV  [78] .

The model  postulate s that  the probabilities  𝐹 2 of generation of an IC of size 2 or higher  and of 

DSB induction  in a short DNA segment  are  proportional to  each other . The validity of this 

assumption  was  scrutinized  for DSB formation in plasmid DNA by  different ion types and  energ ies 

[88 –90] . Fig.  3 shows  a comparison between  the cross -section for  DSB ind uction in viral DNA  [91] 

as a function of  LET and  the  corresponding  probability  𝐹 2, obtained  by simulations in water for a 

target cylinder  with a diameter of 2.3 nm  and  a height of 3.4 nm . In the simulations,  an incident 

rectangular beam  with a width  of 4.6  nm and  a height of  6.8  nm  was used . The  two  y-axes  in  Fig.  3

are proportional to each other , both spanning 2.5 orders of magnitude . Th us, Fig.  3 suggest s that 

the assumed proportionality  is  approximately valid  (with some  experimental  data points deviating 

from the  curve  defined  by the simulations  by a factor of  up to  two.                  

> Fig. 3:Dependence of measured cross -section data for double -strand break (DSB) formation, 𝜎 𝐷𝑆𝐵 , in SV40
> viral DNA [91] on LET (filled symbols ,left y -axis) and the cumulative probability, 𝐹 2, of obtaining an
> ionization cluster size of two or more (open symbols, right y -axis) . These 𝐹 2values were derived from Monte
> Carlo simulations of helium, lithium, carbon and neon ions (of different energies), using a water cylinder
> with a diameter of 2.3 nm and a height of 3.4 nm as the target volume [89,90] . The primary particle beam
> had a rectangular cross section with dimensions twice the magnitude of the target’s dimensions. The
> direction was perpendicular to the cylinder’s axis. 3

However, based  on considerations following the work of Garty et al.  [92,93] , which will be 

discussed in  the next section, one might question  the expectation  whether  of such proportionality     

> 3Fig. 3is reprinted from Radiation Measurements 46 (12), H. Rabus and H. Nettelbeck, Nanodosimetry:
> Bridging the gap to radiation biophysics, 1522 -1528, Copyright (2011), with permission from Elsevier.

10 

would be expected . If  there are  two or more ionizations  in  the  DNA segment  for which no  further 

details  are available  regarding  their spatial locations,  then  the probability  𝑝 2𝑠  of  damage on  both 

strands of DNA  depends on  the ICS , 𝜈 , and is  given  by Eq.  (11 ) [92]  under the assumption that 

each ionization results in a strand break :

𝑝 2𝑠  = 1 − (1

2)

> 𝜈 −1

(11 )

That is, this probability is 50%  for  𝜈  = 2, 75%  for  𝜈  = 3, and 87.5%  for  𝜈  = 4. Considering this 

and  taking into account  that an ionization may have a probability  of  less than  1 for  resulting in a 

strand break,  the predicted probability of DSB induction  shows  non -linear dependence on  𝐹 2 as 

illustrated  in  Fig.  4. The se  data correspond to results obtained  using  the  track structure codes 

PTra  [25]  and Geant4 -DNA  [30 –33]  empl oying  the  probability  of  DSB induction  from  [93] . The data 

show the  expected  saturation -type behavior  when  𝐹 2 approaches its upper limit of unity . This 

implies that  proportionality between  𝐹 2 and DSB induction  is  only expected  for small values of  𝐹 2,

i.e., when  the probability  𝑃 2 for two ionizations dominates. 

Bug et al.  [94]  later confirmed this  in their work  us ing  a Bayesian approach  to determine the 

likelihood s that an  SSB results from an  IC of size  𝜈  and that a DSB results from  an IC of at least  𝑘 

ionizations  in a DNA target of 10 base pairs.  Among the four radiation qualities considered,  a DSB 

was most likely  to  result  from  an IC with  𝑘  = 2 for the sparsely ionizing  5 MeV proton and 20  MeV 

alpha particle . For these two radiation qualities , an  SSB was  also  most likely to result from an IC 

of  𝜈  = 1. However, f or  more  densely ionizing  radiation , this was no longer the case. For  example ,

for a  60  MeV  12 C ion , a DSB  had an IC with  𝑘  = 6 as its most likely origin.  One  caveat  of these 

findings is that they  used  the  value  for the  probability of an ionization result ing  in a strand break 

as  determined in the work of Garty et al.  [92] . However,  the probability  derived by Garty et al. 

conceptually  did not pertain  only  to  direct strand breaks.                   

> Fig. 4:Correlation between the probability of double -strand break (DSB) induction, as predicted by the
> combinatorial model (Section 3.2 ), and the cumulative probability 𝐹 2for an ionisation cluster size of at least
> two by particles with an LET between 5 keV/μm and 220 keV/μm. These values were derived from the
> ionization cluster size distributions simulated with the PTra code (PTB) and Geant4 -DNA, where G4Ch and
> G4SR correspond to the respective Screened Rutherford a nd Champion models used for elastic scattering
> of electron s.4
> 4Fig. 4is reprinted from Radiation Measurements 46 (12), H. Rabus and H. Nettelbeck, Nanodosimetry:
> Bridging the gap to radiation biophysics, 1522 -1528, Copyright (2011), with permission from Elsevier.

11 

## 3.2  The  combinatorial  model  of  Garty  et al. 

The approach of Garty et al.  [92,93]  is based on ICS distributions measured with the Ion 

Counter  nanodosimeter  [14,95] . These distributions  are assumed to be representative of the ICS 

distribution in an equivalent target in biological matter. The determination of the size of the 

equivalent  volume  relies on the scaling relation proposed by Grosswendt (see Appendix  A). The 

variant  for  produced  ionizations  [40]  was used,  which  implicitly assume s a 100  % detection 

efficiency  for the nanodosimeter.  Using the same scaling factor  for lateral dimensions  as well ,

the beam size used in the experiments  corresponds to a beam size in biological matter of 56  nm. 

The first version of the model  [92]  had only one parameter  𝑝 𝑠 , which  represent ed the  constant 

probability of an ionization to result in a  DNA  strand break,  regardless  whe re  the ionization 

occur red  in  the  target volume . The  nanometric  target volume  was assumed to  be a cylinder  of 

4.5  nm  in  diameter  and  8 nm  in  height , representing  a DNA segment of 16 base pairs (2.3  nm in 

diameter and 5.4  nm in height) surrounded by a hydration layer  with a  thickness  of 1.3 nm.  Th us, 

the model includes indirect effects from water radiolysis and  the subsequ en t reactions of 

produced radical species with DNA , which  result in a strand break. The model parameter  𝑝 𝑠 

corresponds to  the  average probability resulting from  the combined  direct and indirect effects. 

A later version of the model  [93]  includes  a second parameter , 𝑝 𝑏  , which  represen ts the 

constant probability  that  base damage  will occur  when an ionization  takes place  anywhere in the 

target cylinder.  In this  study , the  simulated  nanometric target volume  was  estimated to be  a

cylinder  of 4.3 nm  in  diameter  and  a height  of  6 nm , interpreted as  a segment of DNA  surrounded 

by  a 1 nm -thick  water shell . Assum ing the  presence of  a water shell on the top and bottom of the 

target cylinder  as well , the DNA content corresponds to  approximately  12 base pairs.  (T he  height 

of the  cylinder  corresponds to 18  DNA base pairs.) 

The joint probability  of  having  𝑛 𝑠  strand breaks  and  𝑛 𝑏  base damages  is obtained  by 

considering the multinomial  probability  of  obtaining these values  through  random sampling from 

𝜈  ionizations in the target cylinder (Eq.  (12 )). 

𝑝 (𝑛 𝑠 , 𝑛 𝑏 ) = ∑ 𝑓 𝜈 

𝜈 !

𝑛 𝑠 ! 𝑛 𝑏 ! (𝜈  − 𝑛 𝑠  − 𝑛 𝑏 )! 𝑝 𝑠  

> 𝑛 𝑠

𝑝 𝑏 𝑛 𝑏  (1 − 𝑝 𝑠  − 𝑝 𝑏 )𝜈 −𝑛 𝑠 −𝑛 𝑏 

> 𝜈 ≥𝑛 𝑠 +𝑛 𝑏

(12 )

Note  that in Eqs.  (12 ) and  (13 ), 𝑓 𝜈  is used instead of  𝑃 𝜈  to emphasize that the model relies on 

measured ICS distributions  (or  ICS distributions from simulations of the measurement).  The 

probability  of inducing a DSB , 𝑝 𝐷𝑆𝐵 , is obtained  by multiplying  Eq.  (12 ) by the probability of  at least 

one SB per strand (Eq.  (11 )) and summing over  𝑛 𝑏 . The re sult is  given in  Eq.  (13 ) [93] .

𝑝 𝐷𝑆𝐵  = ∑ 𝑓 𝜈  [1 − 2 (1 − 𝑝 𝑠 

2 )

> 𝜈

+ (1 − 𝑝 𝑠 )𝜈 ]

> 𝜈 ≥2

(13 )

Additionally , double -strand  lesions (DSL) were considered in which each strand contains at 

least one  break or base damage. The corresponding probability  𝑝 𝐷𝑆𝐿  is  obtained  by  replacing  𝑝 𝑠 

in Eq.  (13 ) by  𝑝 𝑡  = 𝑝 𝑠  + 𝑝 𝑏 . The probability of a non -DSB lesion  affecting both strands is  obtained 

by subtracting  𝑝 𝐷𝑆𝐵  from  𝑝 𝐷𝑆𝐿  [93] .

The model parameters  were obtained by fitting predicted yields  of DSBs and DSLs  to  the 

experimental data  from  plasmid DNA assays  [96] . Conversion  from probabilities  to yields was 

performed  by estimating the  average energy imparted in the target  as  Δ𝐸  = 𝑀 1 × 𝑊 𝑖 , where  𝑀 1 is 

the mean ICS and  𝑊 𝑖  is the (macroscopic) mean energy  per ionization.  The a bsorbed dose  𝐷  was 12 

then obtained  by dividing  the energy imparted,  Δ𝐸 , by  the mass  of  the  nanometric  target volume ,

𝑚 𝑇𝑉  . Using  Eq. (14 ), the yields of different DNA  damage  are obtained , where  the subscript  d

indicates the type of damage (SSB, DSB, DSL)  and  𝑚 𝐷𝑁𝐴  represents  the mass content  of DNA in 

the target volume. 

𝐺 𝑑  = 𝑝 𝑑 

𝐷  × 𝑚 𝐷𝑁𝐴 

= 𝑚 𝑇𝑉 

𝑀 1 × 𝑊 𝑖  × 𝑚 𝐷𝑁𝐴 

× 𝑝 𝑑  (14 )

It is worth noting that in both papers of Garty et al.  [92,93]  the expressions for the  gains  were 

written in a dimension -free style by which the  mass of the DNA content did not appear explicitly. 

In  both papers  a value of 6500  Da was used for  𝑚 𝐷𝑁𝐴  which  seems  inconsequential given the 

actual lengths of the DNA segment s assumed.  Furthermore , the second paper  [93]  states that 

𝑚 𝑇𝑉  pertains to the  mass of the  (macroscopic)  target volume  in the nanodosimeter , meaning  that 

all parameters entering the yield , except  𝑊 𝑖  , were obtained experimentally . However, t his 

appears  inconsistent  with the scaling relation  according to  which the  diameter of the target 

volume  (and not the target volume itself)  is inversely proportional to  the  mass density  (Appendix 

A). Thus,  the mass es  of the macroscopic and nanometric volumes  are  different . (In fact, they 

differ by  twelve orders of magnitude .)  This  also ignores the  difference in the mean free path for 

ionization between different materials, which the scaling relation accounts for. 

The  yields  predicted  by the model were  benchmarked  against  PARTRAC  simulations  of  protons 

over a wide energy range  [83] , where good agreement  of  better than 10 % was  generally  found. 

The p redictions  were also compared with  experimental data from various studies (see Section  3.4 

in  [93] ). The  model reproduced the  LET dependence  of  the  yield of DSBs in irradiated V79 cells in 

the  LET  range  up to 100  keV/μm.  However , the  trend of the  LET  dependence of non -DSB lesion 

clusters was not correct ly predicted.  Radiochemical reactions within large ion ization  clusters ,

which are not considered in the model, were discussed  as  one  po ss ible expl an ation .

Schulte et al. used  a variant of the  first version of the model  to  derive n anodosimetry -based 

predictions of radiation  quality factors for  high -LET radiation s for  application s in  radiation 

protection  dosimetry in space  [97] . They  simulated  measurements with the Ion Counter 

nanodosimeter using a dedicated track structure code  [98]  for electrons  with an  energy  of 

100  keV, protons  with energies ranging from  0.5  MeV  to  250  MeV,  4He ions  with energies ranging 

from  1 MeV  to  30  MeV, and  12 C ions  with energies ranging from  10  MeV  to  250  MeV.  These 

combinations of particle type and energy  covered  the LET range between 0.4  keV/μm and 

800  keV/μm. The model parameter  𝑝 𝑠  was assumed to be independent of LET and to have a value 

of 0.15  ± 0.05. Three different heights of the sensitive volume were considered, 7  nm, 16  nm, and 

150  nm , which  correspond  to about 20, 50, and 500 base pairs , respectively . The quantity derived 

from the ICS distributions was the  probability  𝑝 𝑐𝐷𝑆𝐵  of form ing  a complex DSB . This probability  is 

given by Eq.  (15 ), where the symbol  (𝜈 

2) represents a binomial coefficient. 

𝑝 𝑐𝐷𝑆𝐵  = 𝑝 𝐷𝑆𝐵  − ∑ 𝑓 𝜈  (𝜈 

2) 𝑝 𝑠 2

2 (1 − 𝑝 𝑠 )𝜈 −2

> 𝜈 ≥2

(15 )

The resulting  yield of complex DSBs  𝐺 𝑐𝐷𝑆𝐵  is given  by  Eq.  (16 ), where  𝑊 𝑖  is again the mean energy 

per ionization :

𝐺 𝑐𝐷𝑆𝐵  = 𝑝 𝑐𝐷𝑆𝐵 

𝑀 1 × 𝑊 𝑖 

(16 )13 

As can be seen by compari ng  with Eq.  (14 ), it was  implicit ly  assum ed  that the sensitive volume is 

identical to the volume occupied by DNA. 

Nanodosimetric quality factors were obtained  by calculating  the ratio of the yield for complex 

DSBs , according to Eq.  (16 ), from the ICS distributions produced by particles of given type and 

energy , divided by  the yield  obtained for the reference radiation, which was 100  keV electrons. 

Fig.  5 shows a comparison of the quality factors obtained for protons (diamonds), helium ions 

(triangles) and carbon ions (squares) with  the  quality factors  defined in ICRP publication 60 ( thick 

line). It can be seen that the nanodosimetric quality factors reproduce the increasing trend of the 

quality factors at LET values up to 80  keV/μm but fail to capture the decrease at higher LET values. 

There is also  a clear  difference between protons and heavier ions. As shown in  [97] , this difference 

among  particle types and general trends are essentially insensitive to the choice of model 

parameter  with in the considered  range  between 0.1 and 0.2. Compari ng  results for different  𝑝 𝑠 

values  and heights indicat ed  that Q -factors decrease with LET for higher LET values when larger 

𝑝 𝑠  values  and heights of the sensitive volume are used.          

> Fig. 5:Comparison of the radiation quality factor Q as a function of LET from ICRP Publication 60 (thick line)
> and nanodosimetry -based quality factors derived by Schulte et al. from ICS distributions obtained for a
> cylindrical sensitive volume with a diameter of 2 nm and a height of 16 nm. 5

## 3.3  The correlation  approach of  Conte  et al. 

The approach of Conte  et al.  [45,47,99 –101]  was  based on  findin gs within the European joint 

research project BioQuaRT (Biologically weighted quantities in radiation therapy)  [68,102]  and  the 

Italian project MITRA (M icrodosimetry and  track  structure) . As part of the BioQuaRT  project, 

pairwise comparisons of the  three nanodosimeters exi sting at that time were  performed  by 

measuring the same ion beams.  The  Ion Counter and Startrack nanodosimeters, simulating 

target diameters  of  2 nm and 20 nm, respectively,  were  compared by  perform ing measurements 

at the accelerator facilities of the Italian Nuclear Research C enter in Legnaro, Italy . Protons and      

> 5Fig. 5is r eprinted from Zeitschrift für Medizinische Physik 18 (4), R. Schulte et al., Nanodosimetry -based
> quality factors for radiation protection in space, 286 -296, Copyright (2008), with permission from Elsevier.

14 

> 12

C-ion  beam s with  energies per mass  between 3.5 MeV/u and 20 MeV/u  were used . The 

comparison of the Ion Counter  and the Jet Counter  was  performed at the Heavy Ion  Accelerator 

Laboratory  of Warsaw University  in  Poland.  The simulated target sizes at unit density in nitrogen 

were 1.3  nm for the Ion Counter  and  1.6  nm and 3.2  nm for the Jet Counter . Measurements were 

taken  for 45  MeV and 76  MeV carbon ions. 

The results  of these measurements , along with  data measured previously with the 

nanodosimeters  for protons,  4He, and  12 C ions  [48,49,103 –105] , suggested  the existence of  a

universal relation ship  between the  measured  mean ICS and  the  first three  cumulative 

probabilities for ionization clusters of  minimum sizes of one, two, and three  [45,47] . Th is  universal 

relation showed qualitative similarity with the LET dependence of cell inactivation cross section 

data  in the particle irradiation data ensemble (PIDE)  [87] .

Cell inactivation cross section s,  𝜎 𝑖  , are  derived from  the  relative  slope s of survival curves 

according to the  linear -quadratic (LQ) model  of cell survival , 𝑆 , as a function of absorbed dose , 𝐷 

[106] . It is given by  Eq.  (17 ), where  𝛷  is  the particle fluence .

𝜎 𝑖 (𝐷 ) = − 1

𝑆 (𝐷 )

𝑑𝑆 (𝐷 )

𝑑𝐷  × 𝐷 

𝛷  = − 1

𝑆 (𝛷 )

𝑑𝑆 (𝛷 )

𝑑𝛷  (17 )

As indicated by the second identity in Eq.  (17 ), 𝜎 𝑖 (𝐷 ) can be interpreted as the  expect ed number 

of additional  lesions leading to inactivation  caused by an  additional ion hitting the cell.  Obviously, 

𝜎 𝑖 (𝐷 ) depends on the dose value . I n the work of Conte et al. , two cases were considered : the dose 

corresponding to an expected survival rate of 5  % and  the limit of very small doses. The 

corresponding  values of  𝜎 𝑖  were denoted as  𝜎 5%  and  𝜎 𝛼 , respectively. 

Since  the  𝑀 1 and  𝐹 𝑘  parameters  of ICS distributions are dimensionless quantities , a linear 

model was assumed  to fit  the  universal curves from  nanodosimetric  measurements  to the 

experimental radiobiological data from the PIDE database . This model used  proportionality 

factors between  𝑀 1 and LET , as well as  between  𝐹 𝑘  and  𝜎 5%  and  𝜎 𝛼 , respectively  [45] .

The analysis was performed  on  three different cell lines, namely V 79,  HSG and CHO cells , for 

which  corresponding data were available in the PIDE database. For  𝜎 5%  , the  best match was 

found for the cumulative probability  𝐹 2 as a function of  𝑀 1, as illustrated in the left panel of  Fig.  6

for the case of V79 cells  and in the left panel of  Supplementary Fig.  2 for the other cell types . In 

contrast,  the  best -fitting  curve  for  𝜎 𝛼  was that of  𝐹 3 as a function of  𝑀 1 , as  shown  in  the right 

panel s of  Fig.  6 and  Supplementary Fig.  2. The scaling factors for the  𝐹 𝑘  were in the  range between 

50  μm² and 80  μm² , i.e. , comparable to  the geometric cross sections  of the  cell nucle i. The se 

values depended on cell type and varied  up to  20 % between  𝜎 5%  and  𝜎 𝛼  . The scaling  factors 

between  𝑀 1 and LET  were  established by track structure simulations . The b est fits between 

nanodosim etric  and radiobiologic  data  were found when  the  ICS  distribution was determined  in 

a target equivalent to a  cylindrical  water  target  with a  diameter and height  1 nm for the  𝜎 5%  data 

and to a  water cylinder  with a  diameter and  a height  of 1.5  nm for the  𝜎 𝛼  data  [45] .15              

> Fig. 6:Results of the linear fit of the measured dependence of nanodosimetric parameters 𝐹 𝑘 as a function
> of the mean ICS 𝑀 1to radiobiological data for the inactivation cross section at 5 % survival rate (left) and in
> the limit of small dose values (right). The symbols represent data from the PIDE database [87] plotted as a
> function of LET (upper x -axis). The lines represent the best fit to the nanodosimetric data scaled bi -linearly
> such as to match the radiobiological data. 6

The same analysis was also performed for repair -deficient XRS5 cells , for  which  the best fit was 

obtained  using  the parameter  𝐹 1 as a function of  𝑀 1 . The scaling factor for  𝐹 1 was found to be 

190  μm², i.e., comparatively large. The scaling factor for  𝑀 1 corresponded to a water cylinder  with 

a diameter  and height  of 0.3  nm. 

In follow -up work , t he nanodosimetric dataset was extended  by  including  nanodosimetric  data 

taken from the literature , including electrons as primary particles  [47] . A sensitivity analysis was 

performed  for the case of  𝜎 5%  by also  considering  water  cylinders  of  equal  diameter s and height s

of  0.5  nm  and  1.5  nm , demonstrating the optimality of the value 1  nm found earlier.  In addition, 

expressions  were obtained  for the parameters  𝛼  and  𝛽  of the  LQ model  in terms  of  the 

nanodosimetric  parameters  𝐹 2 and  𝐹 3 , determined in targets of size s of  1.0  nm and 1.5  nm, 

respectively . These expressions  had the form  given in Eq.  (18 ), where  𝑆  is  a survival rate of 5  %

and  𝑐 𝛼  and  𝑐 𝑆  are  proportional to the ratio of fluence  𝛷  to  absorbed  dose  𝐷 .

𝛼  = 𝑐 𝛼 𝐹 3 ; 𝛽  = 𝛼 2 − (𝑐 𝑆 𝐹 2)2

4 ln  𝑆  (18 )

The corresponding proportionality factors are assumed to be independent of radiation quality, so 

that they can be determined by “calibration” with the known values of the parameters  𝛼  and  𝛽  for 

a reference radiation quality.  This enabled the parameters  𝑐 𝛼  and  𝑐 𝑆  to be calculated  for  any 

radiation quality  and  was  shown to lead to  reasonable fits of the survival curves of V79 for a 

selection of LET values  [47,99] .

To further study the  influence of target size  on  the functional dependence of  the parameters  𝐹 𝑘 

on  𝑀 1, track structure simulations were performed  in later work  for protons, helium and carbon 

ions of different energies  [100] . The projectile s were  travelling in propane  gas,  and ICS 

distributions were obtained  for central passage of  spherical target volumes  of different  size    

> 6Fig. 6is a merger of two figures r eprinted from Radiation Measurements 106 (1), V. Conte et al., Track
> structure characterization and its link to radiobiology, 506 -511, Copyright (2017), with permission from
> Elsevier.

16 

equivalent  to  spheres  in water with  diameters  between 0.5  nm  and 10  nm . The  functional 

dependence was assumed to be given by  Eq.  (19 ).

𝐹 𝑘 (𝑀 1|𝐷 𝑡 ) = 1 − Π̃𝑘 −1(𝑀 1|𝐷 𝑡 )𝑒 −𝐶 1(𝐷 𝑡 )𝑀 1 (19 )

Here,  𝐷 𝑡  denotes the diameter of the target sphere,  Π̃𝑛  is a polynomial  of degree  𝑛  in  the 

independent  variable  𝑀 1, and  𝐶 1 is one of the  parameters of the  function. The  coefficient of the 

zeroth -order term of  Π̃𝑛  is unity  for all  𝑛 , and the other  coefficients  and  𝐶 1 depend o n the target 

diameter  [100] . However , the  non -trivial  coefficien ts of the polynomials  depend on  only two 

model  parameters , 𝐶 2(𝐷 𝑡 ) and  𝐶 3(𝐷 𝑡 ).

Conte et al.  [100]  derived  the model parameters  based on  earlier work of De Nardo et al.  [107] .

In this approach, the  ICS probabilities are derived from  probabilistic considerations of  a

compound Poisson process . Specifically,  the probabilities  𝑃 𝜈  are  written  according to the law of 

total probability as the sum of the probabilities  of  𝜅  ionizing interactions  of the primary particle in 

the target volume , multiplied by the conditional probabilit y of form ing  a cluster of size  𝜈  when  𝜅 

interactions of the primary particle occur.  Th is conditional probability  is assumed to be given by 

𝜅  -fold convolution of the probability distribution corresponding to a single ionization of the 

primary particle in the target volume. 

Using the  resulting  parameterization of the function s 𝐹 𝑘 (𝑀 1|𝐷 𝑡 ) and their dependence on the 

target size  𝐷 𝑡 , the optimality  of a target diameter of 1  nm  was reconfirmed  by comparison with 

radiobiological data . Additionally , the known functional dependence  enabled the  investigation of 

whether  using  linear combinations of  𝐹 2 and  𝐹 3 improves the fits between  nanodosimetric 

parameters and  radiobiological cross sections for inactivation. The outcome  showed  that , when 

both  𝐹 2 and  𝐹 3 are  determined for a  spherical target  with a  diameter of 1  nm,  𝜎 5%  and  𝜎 𝛼  are best 

reproduced as proportional to  0.8𝐹 2 + 0.2𝐹 3 and  0.2𝐹 2 + 0.8𝐹 3 , respectively.  Notably,  these 

combinations can also be written as  0.8𝑃 2 + 𝐹 3 and  0.2𝑃 2 + 𝐹 3 . That is, the main difference 

between high and low -dose inactivation cross -sections appears to  be  the  contribution of clusters 

of size 2. 

By definition, t he complementary cumulative frequencies  𝐹 2 and  𝐹 3 depend only on the 

probabilities  of  ICS  values  between 0 and 2 . Therefore,  further work  [101]  studied  the dependence 

of the probabilities  𝑃 𝜈  on  𝑀 1 for  𝜈  ∈ {0,1,2,3}, i.e.  also  including the parameter  𝐹 47. The study  used 

simulations of  the tracks of protons,  4He,  12 C, and  20 Ne ions  with energies per mass  ranging from 

1 MeV/u to 330  MeV/u  in propane  gas. The  target size considered  correspond s to a sphere  with a 

diameter of 1  nm  in liquid water.  Based on  the same theoretical assumptions  as  before , the 

expressions for  the functional dependence of  𝑃 𝜈  on  𝑀 1 for  𝜈  ≥ 1 have the form  given in Eq.  (20 ).

𝑃 𝜈 (𝑀 1) = 𝑀 1Π𝜈 −1(𝑀 1)𝑒 −𝐶 1𝑀 1 (20 )

Here , Π𝑛  is a polynomial of degree  𝑛  in the  independent variable  𝑀 1, related to the polynomial s in 

Eq.  (17 ) by  𝛱 ̃𝑛 +1(𝑀 1) = 1 + 𝑀 1Π𝑛 (𝑀 1).

Further, i t was demonstrated that , for the considered  radiation qualities and  irradiation 

geometry of ions  passing centrally  through the target volume,  𝑀 1 is  approximat ely  proportional to 

the mean number of ionizations  produced by the primary particle , with a  proportionality constant 

of  1.103  ± 0.003  [101] . Addition ally , the dependence of  𝑀 1 on  particle energy  was shown to  be 

well reproduced by a three -parameter model function  with energy per mass as  the  independent              

> 7Note that i n th e corresponding work [101] , Conte et al. used the quantities 𝐹 𝑘
> ∗=𝐹 𝑘 +1, i.e. 𝐹 𝑘
> ∗is the
> probability of ICS exceeding 𝑘 ionizations.

17 

variable . Differences between ions could be taken into  account by considering  the effective 

projectile charge according to the Barkas formula  [108] .

The resulting functional  expressions  were then fitted to  radiobiological data from the PIDE 

database  [87,109] , distinguishing between  experiments conducted under aerobic and hypoxi c

conditions  [101] . The results showed  the  best fit between  𝜎 5%  and  𝐹 3 for hypoxic V79 and HSG 

cells  (cf.  Supplementary Fig.  3a and c) . In contrast,  for aerobic cells a linear combination  of  𝐹 3

and  𝑃 2 had to be used, where the weight of  𝑃 2 depended on the cell type  (cf.  Supplementary 

Fig.  4a and c).  For V79 cells,  𝜎 𝛼  correlated with  𝐹 3 for aerobic conditions and with  𝐹 4 for hypoxic 

conditions  (cf.  Supplementary Fig.  3b and d ). Additional components of  𝑃 2 and  𝑃 3 had to be 

considered  for  aerobic and hypoxic  HSG cells , respectively  (cf.  Supplementary Fig.  4b and d ).

## 3.4  The binomial weighting approach of Mietelska et al. 

Unlike  the correlation approach  of Conte et al. , which  was completely agnostic  to  the 

mechanis m connecting  ionization clusters and radiobiological effects,  the approach of  Mietelska 

et al.  [46]  includes  a mechanistic component in the form  of a weighting function  for the 

probabilities of different ICs. Similar to the  combinatorial  approach of Garty et al.  [92,93] , a 

binomial  distribution  is assumed  for the  conditional  probability of an IC o f size  𝜈  to result in  𝑘  DNA 

lesions . Th e success probability , 𝑝 𝑠 , of  the binomial  process  is assumed to be independent of the 

ICS .

The probability  of  a given number  of DNA lesions , 𝑚  , is then obtained  using  the derived 

nanodosimetric parameters , 𝑅 𝑚 , as  defined by Eq.  (21 ).

𝑅 𝑚 (𝑝 𝑠 ) = ∑ ∑ 𝑃 𝜈 𝐵 (𝑘 |𝜈 , 𝑝 𝑠 )

> 𝜈
> 𝑘 =𝑚
> ∞
> 𝜈 =𝑚

(21 )

Given  the normalization of the conditional probabilities  and the definition s of  𝐹 𝑚  and the 

binomial  distribution , Eq.  (21 ) can be rewritten as Eq.  (22 ).

𝑅 𝑚 (𝑝 𝑠 ) = 𝐹 𝑚  − ∑ 𝑃 𝜈  ∑ (𝜈 

𝑘 ) 𝑝 𝑠 

> 𝑘

(1 − 𝑝 𝑠 )𝜈 −𝑘 

> 𝑚 −1
> 𝑘 =0
> ∞
> 𝜈 =𝑚

(22 )

Mietelska et al. only considered the case  𝑚  = 2, which  results in  Eq.  (23 ).

𝑅 2(𝑝 𝑠 ) = 𝐹 2 − ∑ 𝑃 𝜈 (1 − 𝑝 𝑠 )𝜈 

> ∞
> 𝜈 =2

− 𝑝 𝑠  ∑ 𝜈𝑃 𝜈 (1 − 𝑝 𝑠 )𝜈 −1

> ∞
> 𝜈 =2

(23 )

The parameter  𝑅 2 is assumed to represent the probability of a DNA  double -strand  break. 

Therefore, while  the approach of Mietelska et al.  [46]  contain s elements of the  approach of Garty 

et al.  [92,93] , it  considers two DNA lesions sufficient for induction  of a DSB without taking into 

account  the location of  these lesions  on the two strands . In this respect, t he approach  of 

Mietelska et al.  appears to  align with the approach  of Grosswendt. 18                                

> Fig. 7:Comparison of 𝑅 2and 𝐹 𝑘 curves yielding the best fit with radiobiological data for cylindrical target s
> of (A) both diameter and height of 1 nm (and hence a cross section of 1 × 1 nm² )and (B) diameter of 2.3 nm
> and height of 3.4 nm (i.e., cross section of 2.3 × 3.4 nm²). In (A), the optimal fit is achieved with 𝐹 2and 𝑅 2
> for 𝑝 equal to 0.8, while in (B), the best fit is observed for 𝐹 5and 𝑅 2for 𝑝 equal to 0.35. In both cases, 𝑅 2
> provides a better fit than 𝐹 𝑘 .8

Mietelska et al.  [46]  performed  simulations using Geant4 -DNA  for  1H,  4He,  7Li,  11 B,  12 C,  14 N,  16 O, 

and  28 Si ions  in water . The simulations covered  a range of energies between 200  keV and  1 GeV 

and  a range of LET between 6 keV/μm and 650 keV/μm . The target volumes were cylinders  with 

equal  diameter and  height , ranging from 0.8  nm to 2.5  nm.  They  also considered  cylinders  with  a

height of  1.48 times the diameter  and  diameter s between 1.0  nm and 2.3  nm. 

For a cylindrical target  with a diameter of 2.3 nm  and  a height of 3.4 nm,  the  ratio  𝑅 2/𝑀 1 plotted 

versus LET showed clear differences between  hydrogen ions, helium ions , and all heavier ions .

However , the data of the different ions coincided when plotted against  𝑀 1, except for mean ICS 

values below  about 1.5 . At these lower  𝑀 1 values , the  heav ier  ions showed much lower values 

tha n hydrogen and  helium ions  [46] . These findings presumably  pertain to  a value  𝑝 𝑠  = 0.35 , i.e., 

the best fitting parameter for this target size. Unfortunately, the value is  not stated in  [46] , neither 

in the figure caption  nor the  text  related to the figure .

Using  𝜎 5%  data extracted from the  PIDE database  [87,109]  for V79 cells,  the model parameter 

𝑝 𝑠  that provides  the best fit  was determined  for targets  of  different  sizes  using a fixed  scaling 

factor  between probabilities and cross sections.  The optim al  𝑝 𝑠  parameter  varied  from  0.8 f or 

targets  with a  diameter  of  1 nm  and 0.35 for targets  with a  diameter  of  2.3  nm.  𝑅 2 curves based 

on  these optimum  parameter values  can be seen  in  Fig.  7 to better fit the experimental  𝜎 5%  data 

at large  𝑀 1 values  than  the fits to  𝐹 2 and  𝐹 5 for targets  with  diameter and height  of  1 nm  and 

targets  with  diameter of 2.3  nm and height of 3.4  nm , respectively .    

> 8Fig. 7reproduced under the CC BY 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) from [46] ,
> copyright Mietelska et al. 2024.

19 

## 3.5  The  nanodosimetric quantity -weighted dose  of Yang et al. 

Yang et al.  [76]  compar ed  dose -weighting approaches in carbon -ion therapy using RBE 

weighting factors derived from microdosimetry and nanodosimetry.  They  introduced  a radiation 

quantity named  nanodosimetric quantity -weighted dose ( 𝐷 𝑎 −𝑏  

> 𝑄

), as defined by Eq.  (24 ).

𝐷 𝑎 −𝑏  

> 𝑄

= 𝑘  × 𝐹 𝑎 −𝑏 ,𝑄 

> 𝑐

𝐹 𝑎 −𝑏 ,𝑋  

> 𝑐

× 𝐷  (24 )

Here,  𝐹 𝑎 −𝑏  

> 𝑐

are the  conditional  probabilities for ICS between  𝑎  and  𝑏  , as defined in  Eq.  (9). The 

superscripts  Q and  X refer to  the  radiation quality of  the  ion beams and of X -ray s used as  reference 

radiation , respectively . 𝐷  is the absorbed dose, and  𝑘  is  an  adjustable , cell -line -specific  model 

parameter .

The y compared  the  predicted  survival curves derived from the model with  the  experimental 

data  obtained  by Furusawa et al.  [110]  from  irradiations  of  HSG and V79  cells  at different  depths 

in  water  with a  135  MeV/u  primary  carbon ion  beam . In the simulations , m onoenergetic photons 

with an energy of 200 keV were used as  the  reference radiation instead of the 200  kV p X-ray 

spectrum used in the experiments . This  substitution  was justified by the argument that  photon 

energy has little influence on  nanodosimetric quantities.  Further details  on  how the  IC 

distributions were determined, such as target size and irradiation geometry,  are not provided in 

[76] .

In the ir  analysis , Yang et al.  [76] , tested  the  cumulative IC probabilities  with  𝑎  = 3 and  𝑏  ∈

{8,10 ,12 } in  Eq.  (9), as well as  the  probabilities  𝐹 2 

> 𝑐

, 𝐹 3 

> 𝑐

, and  𝐹 4 

> 𝑐

, for which  the upper bound  𝑏  in 

Eq.  (9) is  formally  infinity . The e xperimental c ell  survival fraction s plotted as  a function  of  𝐷 3−10 

> 𝑄

ap peared to  follow the same curve  for all considered values of  LET.  The experimental RBE  plotted 

as a function of  the ratio of  the  𝐹 𝑎 −𝑏  

> 𝑐

probabilities  in  Eq.  (24 ) showed the highest  coefficient of 

determination with  the  𝐹 3−10  

> 𝑐

probability . The cell -specific scaling factor  𝑘  was found to  be  in the 

order of magnitude of unity , differing  by about  25  % between the two cell lines. 

## 3.6  The  machine learning -based approach  of  Bordieri et al. 

In  their  recent work, Bordieri et al.  [111]  employed  machine learning to  examine  the 

relationship  between  microdosimetric and nanodosimetric  properties  of  ion beams and  cell 

survival data  obtained  from the PIDE database  [87,109] . They  used  a machine  learning  model 

based  on the  TabNet  deep neural network architecture . The m icrodosimetric information  used 

was  the  frequency -mean  (𝑦 ̅𝐹 ) and dose -mean  (𝑦 ̅𝐷 ) lineal  energy  in a  water  sphere  with  diameter 

of  1 μm. The nanodosimetric information w as  the  complementary  cumulative probabilities 9 𝐹 2,

𝐹 3, and  𝐹 4 which were  determined by simulations. However, the shape and dimensions  of the  site 

are not specified. 

The  machine learning concept of attention  was used to quantify  the  rel evance of the different 

input feature s, which essentially measures the importance  of  the particular input feature for the 

final regression model . The corresponding findings are shown  in  Fig.  8, which illustrates  a low -

dose case  in the  top panels and for a survival fraction of 10  % in the  bottom panels. The panels 

on  the left apply to protons , and th e panels on  the right  apply  to carbon ions.  The shaded areas 

indicate a 95  % confidence band , and the lines  indicate  the mean values.  The results suggest that       

> 9Note that Bordieri et al. used a similar notation as in [101] , so that their 𝐹 ∗(𝑘 )≡𝐹 𝑘 +1.

20 

nanodosimetric features of track structure  are more  importan t for  more densely ionizing radiation 

and in the low -dose regime.                      

> Fig. 8:Variation of the attention of the deep network to LET, the two microdosimetric features ( 𝑦 ̅𝐹 and 𝑦 ̅𝐷 )
> and the three nanodosimetric features ( 𝐹 2,𝐹 3, and 𝐹 4)with particle energy per mass .(a) and (b) correspond
> to the average of data for absorbed doses of 0.5 Gy, 0.5 Gy, and 0.75 Gy. (c) and (d) relate to a survival level
> of 10 %. (a) and (c) pertain to protons, and (b) and (d) to carbon ions. 10

## 4 Correlated ionization cluster approaches 

## 4.1  The t wo compartment model  of Schulte et al. 

Chron olog ically,  the first attempt to  link  nanodosimetry with biological effects was the t wo -

compartment  model  proposed  by  Schulte et al.  [35]  in 2001 , at a time  when most of the  state -of -

the -art gas -counter nanodosimeters were still under development .

The two -compartment model  considers  cylindrical nanodosimetric site s with a diameter of 

2 nm and  a height  of  16  nm  (corresponding to  a sequence of  approximately  50 base pairs  in the 

DNA  molecule ). Th e choice of target volume appears to  have been  primarily motivated  by the 

availability of published data accessible at that time  regarding  energy deposition by  protons and 

helium ions with energy per mass between  0.3  MeV and 5  MeV.  Furthermore , the  dimension s

were  similar  to  those of  the sensitive volume of the ion counter nanodosimeter when operated 

without  a time window for ion collection.       

> 10 Fig. 8reproduced under the CC BY 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) from
> [111] , rearranging panels and adding labels (a) to (d) . Copyright Bordieri et al. 202 6.

21 

It is assumed that ICs between 2 and 5 in such a target  result in  repairable DNA damage, 

whereas ICs between 6 and 10  create  irreparable damage . Charge and radical recombination  are 

assumed to  lead to a reduced biological effectiveness  for  IC S exceeding  10 , similar to , albeit not 

analogous  to , the known decrease  in  RBE at high LET values . It is further assumed that  reparable 

DNA  damage  may be  misrepaired  and  that  lethal damage resulting from repairable lesions 

follows  a linear -quadratic  dose dependence . In this model , the quadratic term corresponds to 

the  implicit assum ption that  two repairable lesions may interact to form a lethal lesion. 

Irreparable damage is assumed to occur  proportionally  to  the  dose. 

The frequency of l ethal damage  is assumed to  follow  a Poisson distribut ion . Thus , the  resulting 

surviving  probability  𝑆  of cells  as a  function of absorbed dose  𝐷  is  given by  Eq.  (25 ).

𝑆  = 𝑒 −(𝛼 1𝑞 1−𝛼 2𝑞 2)𝐷 −𝛽 𝑞 12𝐷 2 (25 )

The parameters  𝛼 1 and  𝛼 2 are LET -independent and  correspond to the induction of direct lethal 

DNA damage and lethal damage resulting from misrepair of repairable damage, respec tively.  The 

parameter  𝛽  corresponds  to  the  conventional  quadratic  term of the  dose dependence , and  the 

weighting factors  𝑞 1 and  𝑞 2 are  defined by Eq.  (26 ) for a  given  radiation quality  𝑄  and  reference 

radiation quality  𝑄 𝑟𝑒𝑓 .

𝑞 1 = ∑ 𝑃 𝜈 (𝑄 )5

> 𝜈 =2

∑ 𝑃 𝜈  

> 5
> 𝜈 =2

(𝑄 𝑟𝑒𝑓 ) ; 𝑞 2 = ∑ 𝑃 𝜈 (𝑄 )10 

> 𝜈 =6

∑ 𝑃 𝜈  

> 10
> 𝜈 =6

(𝑄 𝑟𝑒𝑓 ) (26 )

In other words , the radiation quality factors are the ratio s of  the probabilities of  small and large 

clusters  of radiation quality  𝑄  to  the probabilities  of  reference  radiation quality  𝑄 𝑟𝑒𝑓 .

The v alues  of  the  radiation  quality parameters  were obtained  from published data for energy 

deposition in the considered target volume  in water . F rom  this data,  IC distributions were 

estimated  according to the law of total probability . The conditional probabilities of an ICS for  a

given energy imparted , 𝜀 , wa s assumed  to be  uniquely determined by  the mean ICS  𝑀 1, estimated 

as  𝑀 1 = 𝜀 /𝑊 , where  𝑊  is the macroscopic mean energy per ion pair . The ICS distribution  was 

assumed  to be a modified Poisson distribution with  𝑀 1 as expectation and a variance reduced by 

a chosen  Fano  factor of  0.3 . T he inverse of  the  Fano  factor  is  the modifying parameter  𝑚  in 

Eq.  (27 ).

𝑃 𝜈 (𝑀 1) = 𝑚  (𝑚 𝑀 1)𝑚𝜈 

Γ(𝑚𝜈  + 1) 𝑒 −𝑚 𝑀 1 (27 )

The  denominator of Eq.  (27 ) is the gamma function, which  satisfies  the identity  Γ(𝑛  + 1) = 𝑛 ! for 

integer values of  𝑛 .

The resulting model function was tested  on  literature  data  of V79 cell survival  [112]  and  it 

reasonably  reproduce d the corresponding survival curves. 

## 4.2  The  track event theory  of Besserer and Schneider 

## 4.2.1  The  original  track event  theory 

The track event theory  (TET)  was  formulated by Besserer and Schneider  [113,114]  as an 

abstract model  of biological radiation effects . While a  potential  relation to  nanodosimetry  was 

me ntioned in the first paper presenting the concept  [113] , it was  only elaborated  on  in later work 

[69,115,116] . Note  that the term “event”  used  in the TET  has  the  same  meaning as in stochastics :22 

a potential outcome of a random process . This differs  from the  use  of this term in  the terminology 

of  microdosimetry. 

The  original TET  [113]  assume s that  all DNA  SSBs  and  the  occurrence of a single  (direct)  DSB 

in a cell nucleus  are non -lethal . In contrast,  two  (direct)  DSBs formed on the same or two different 

chromosomes  are  always  assumed to be  lethal . The model distinguishes between one -track 

events  (OTEs)  and two -track even ts  (TTEs) . An OTE  correspond s to the induction  of  two DSBs in 

the nucleus  by  a single  track ; a TTE corresponds to the induction  of one DSB by a track.  TTEs 

induced by two different tracks result in a  lethal event . OTEs and TTEs are  assumed to be 

statistically independent events “in the terminology of nanodosimetry”  [113] .

It is  further assum ed  that  the  number of  tracks interacting with a cell , the occurrence of  OTEs ,

and  the occurrence  TTEs are  all  Poisson distributed . T he frequenc ies  of  occurrence  of  OTEs and 

TTEs  are  assumed to be  proportional  to the absorbed dose with different proportionality factors ,

𝑝  and  𝑞 , respectively.  Under these assumptions, a cell survives  if  it  experiences  no OTE and no 

more than one TTE . Thus , the probability of survival , 𝑆 , as a function of absorbed dose , 𝐷 , is given 

by Eq.  (28 ).

𝑆 (𝐷 ) = (1 + 𝑞𝐷 )𝑒 −(𝑝 +𝑞 )𝐷  (28 )

When  𝑞𝐷  ≪ 1, Eq.  (28 ) can be transformed into the expression  of the LQ model with  𝛼  = 𝑝  and 

𝛽  = 𝑞 2/2 [113] . In the  asymptotic  limit of  𝑞𝐷  ≫ 1, the model  approaches a n exponential  dose 

dependence  (linear in  the conventional  semi -logarithm ic plots) . The model was used to fit  a set 

of  experimental survival data . The  quality of fit was  found to be comparable  to that of the (three -

parameter) model of Hug and Kellerer  [117] , while the purely phenomenological LQ -model 

generally  showed better performance than both  [113] .

Ngcezu et al.  [118]  pointed out that the model assumptions of exactly two DSBs per OTE and 

the interaction of exactly two TTEs to form a lethal lesion should have been phrased as at least 

two DSBs per OTE and at least two TTEs. Assuming then a Poisson distribution for the nu mber of 

tracks interacting with a cell and  equal  probabilities of all tracks to produce an OTE or a TTE, the 

frequencies of OTEs and TTEs are Poisson distributed and the frequency distributions  are 

statistically independent.  This also leads to Eq.  (28 ) but requires  fewer model assumptions. 

## 4.2.2  Track event theory with repair 

The second version  of the TET  also  accounted for  repair  by introducing a  third parameter , 𝑅 ,

which  represent s the probability  of  repairing  two DSBs  produced  either  by an OTE or two TTE s.

This  results in  a more complex dose dependence,  wherein  the factor  preceding  the exponential 

is  modified such that the parameter  𝑞  is  replaced by a  second -order  polynomial  𝛱 2 in the 

absorbed dose  [114] .

𝑆 (𝐷 ) = (1 + 𝛱 2(𝐷 |𝑝 , 𝑞 , 𝑅 ) × 𝐷 )𝑒 −(𝑝 +𝑞 )𝐷  (29 )

The coefficients of this polynomial depend  on the  parameters  𝑝 , 𝑞 , and  𝑅 .

To reduce the number of free parameters to two  again , it was  argued  that the  ratio of the 

parameters  𝑝  and  𝑞  should depend  only  on  the chromatin structure , so  that cells having the same 

basic chromatin structure would have the same ratio , 𝜀  = 𝑝 /𝑞 , when irradiated  with  the same 

radiation quality .

The  second -version model was fitted to a large  set  of  radiobiological survival data comprising 

42 different cell lines irradiated at comparable dose rates with either  60 Co,  137 Cs, or X -rays o f at 

least 220  kV peak voltage to ensure comparability of radiation quality  across  all experiments. 

Initially  fitting  all  model  parameters  𝑝  , 𝑞  and  𝑅  allowed deriving an estimate for  𝜀  . In a second 23 

pass, this value of  𝜀  was kept fixed, and only  𝑞  and  𝑅  were allowed to vary.  With the second -

version TET using only two free parameters (i.e. , keeping  𝜀  fixed), statistically significant fits were 

obtained for 36 of the datasets, whereas with the conventional LQ model this was only the case 

for 32 dataset s.

In their analysis of the TET, Ngcezu et al.  [118]  noted  that  the model assumptions regarding 

repair cover  only a fraction of the cases  possible . Since  the model considered  only the repair of a 

pair of DSBs (produced by an OTE or two TTEs),  it  does not  address  how  cases  involving  more than 

two lesions produced by a single track, more than two tracks producing one lesion each, or 

combinations of OTEs and TTEs would be affected by repair.  Additionally, they  pointed out that 

the derivation of Eq.  (29 ) seemed to  implicitly assume that lesions produced in the same cell from 

an OTE and by two TTEs are repaired independently, i.e., as if they occurred in two different cells .

The illustration of the model in  [114] , a ccording to Ngcezu et al.  [118] , suggested that four or more 

DNA lesions in a cell would always be lethal ; however,  the consequences of more than two DNA 

lesions  were  not explicitly addressed. Therefore,  Ngcezu et al.  [118]  proposed  that the  model 

required an additional parameter to  distinguish between  always -fatal  and  potentially -fatal 

events. They also suggested that  outcome  of  repair depends on the number of lesions induced ,

not  on  how they were induced.  Considering  cells in which more than two DSBs are produced  and 

assuming these to be always lethal  yields  a simpler model equation than Eq.  (29 ). This equation 

has no mixed terms between OTEs and TTEs , but  it  requires  a fourth model paramete r [118] .

## 4.2.3  Track event theory  and  nanodosimetry 

Although  nanodosimetry was  mentioned in the first work on the TET  [113] , the relationship 

between the  parameters of the  TET and nanodosimetry was  first  discussed in work  of  Schneider 

et al.  [119] . They  proposed that  th e ratio  𝜀  = 𝑝 /𝑞  could  be  factorized into  two  part s: one 

depending  only  on radiation quality and  the other one  depending  only  on chromatin organization .

Th is  geometrical part , 𝜀 𝑔𝑒𝑜  , was  determined  by  considering voxelized  models of 

tetranucleosomes  with  cubic voxels  with a side of  2 nm . Two different approaches  were explored 

to determin e whether  voxels  wer e hit. One  approach  assum ed  uniformly distributed ionizations ,

while the second  used  ray -tracing  simulations . In the latter  approach , t wo  tetranucleosomes 

were placed  in  close  proximity  at  the center of  a sphere  with a diameter of  32  nm , and chords 

through the sphere were determined by randomly choosing entrance and exit pos itions .

Intersections  of a voxel  by a chord w ere  counted as  a DSB .

To  determin e the part  𝜀 𝑖𝑜𝑛  , which  depend s on radiation quality , Grosswendt ’s  assumptions 

[42,77,78]  were used : an ICS of  at least  two  in  a voxel of the  considered tetranucleosome  model 

corresponds to a DSB and an ICS of  one  corresponds to an SSB . Using  the corresponding 

probabilities , 𝐹 2 and  𝑃 1, t he parameter  𝜀 𝑖𝑜𝑛  is  determined  according to  Eq.  (30 ):

𝜀 𝑖𝑜𝑛  = (𝐹 2

𝑃 1

> 2

)

> 2

(30 )

However , It  should  be noted  that this implies an implicit modification of the  model 

assumptions . N ow a TTE is assumed to correspond to two SSBs induced in different voxels.  (In 

the original TET, a TTE was the induction of one DSB in the nucleus.) Furthermore,  the lethal 

combination of two TTEs  now  require s that  both tracks produce SSBs in the same voxels. 

In later work  by Schneider et al.  [115] , a different connection between the TET and 

nanodosimetry was discussed . They  modified  two  of the original model assumptions such that 24 

an OTE is  now  equivalent to the induction of one DSB and a TTE  is  equivalent to an SSB.  The lethal 

combination of two TTEs corresponds to the occurrence of SSBs in the same volume by different 

tracks.  Using  Grosswendt ’s assumptions , the parameter  𝜀  is now determined by using Eq.  (31 ).

𝜀 𝑖𝑜𝑛  = 𝑝 1 

> 𝑒

× 𝐹 2

𝑓 2 

> 𝑒

× 𝑃 1 

> 2

(31 )

Here,  𝑝 1 

> 𝑒

and  𝑓 2 

> 𝑒

represent  the  probability  of finding  one  or at least  two  electron s with in  the 

sensitive volume . The frequency of electrons is  assumed to be Poisson distributed  again . The 

nanodosimetric probabilities  𝑃 1 and  𝐹 2 are  conditional  probabilities  for one or at least two 

ionizations in the target volume  by an electron hitting it , respectively .

The v alues of  𝑝 1 

> 𝑒

and  𝑓 2 

> 𝑒

were determined for electrons  with energies of  100  keV , 500  keV , and 

1000  keV  using simulations based on the NOREC code  [120]  in a voxelized geometry  with  cubic 

voxels of 2  nm side.  The union of all voxels traversed by  (straight -line) steps of  primary or 

secondary electrons  between  interactions  was defined as the track volume  𝑉 𝑇𝑟𝑎 . The  sum  of all 11 

electron  steps  between interaction s was defined as the track length  𝑙 𝑇𝑟𝑎 . Three different  sensitive 

biological targets were considered : a single DNA segment,  two adjacent  chromatin fibers , and 

chromatin  loops . E ach  target is  characterized by a typical  dimension  𝑙 𝑆𝑒𝑛  (diameter or length). 

The number  of sensitive targets affected by an electron track , 𝑛 𝑆𝑒𝑛 , was estimated as  𝑛 𝑆𝑒𝑛  =

𝑙 𝑇𝑟𝑎 /𝑙 𝑆𝑒𝑛 . The number  of sensitive targets , 𝑛 𝑅𝑎𝑑 , in  the  irradiated volume , 𝑉 𝑅𝑎𝑑 , was estimated  as 

𝑛 𝑅𝑎𝑑  = 𝑉 𝑅𝑎𝑑 /𝑉 𝑆𝑒𝑛 , where  𝑉 𝑆𝑒𝑛  denotes  the volume of the sensitive structure . I t appears that the 

irradiated volume is assumed to be completely filled with sensitive structures . The  expect ed 

number of  electron  tracks traversing  a sensitive  volume is estimated by the proportion of  sensitive 

volumes that are traversed by a track. 

## 4.2.4  RBE model  based on track event theory and nanodosimetry 

Another  version  of the  connection between the  track event theory  (with out  repair)  and 

nanodosimetr y was presented  by  Schneider  et al.  [116] . They considered t wo  relevant  target 

volumes of different sizes . First , a basic interaction volume (BIV) in the form of a sphere  with a 

diameter of  2 nm  represents  a DNA segment of  5 to  10 base pairs  and  constitutes  the target for 

formation of DSBs . On the other  hand, a larger sensitive volume containing several BIVs  is  named 

the  lethal interaction volume (LIV).  An  OTE is  defined as  the induction of two or more  DSBs  in  the 

LIV  by a single track , while  a TTE  is  defined as two DSBs  (in  two different BIVs)  produced by two 

tracks, each producing one DSB .

The probability of  production of a DSB  in a BIV  is assumed to be  equal to the probability  𝐹 2 of 

forming  an IC of two or  more . The formation of ICs in  different BIVs  with in the LIV  is  assumed  to 

oc cur statistically independent ly . This  allows us  to  deriv e expressions for the  TET  parameter s 𝑝 

and  𝑞  in terms of  𝐹 2. Solving Eq.  (28 ) for dose  𝐷  then provide s an expression for RBE  under the 

assum ption  that the parameter  𝑞  is independent of radiation quality . The resulting RBE is a 

function of  the ratio of the LIV  and  BIV  diameters  and the  probability  𝐹 2, which depends on particle 

type and energy . The energy dependence of RBE was obtained  by performing  track structure 

simulations for  photons, protons, helium  ions , and carbon ions . C ompar ing the results to 

experimental data  allowed  to  identify  the best -fitting  LIV diameter. The result was that the optim al          

> 11 In fact, Schneider et al. [115] give separate resu lts for the track length of primary and all secondary
> electron s. Since this distinction is not mentioned with the introduction of the symbol for the track length, it
> appears logical that the total track length is meant.

25 

LIV diameter depend s on  the  particle type , ranging from 35  nm for photons to  6 nm for carbon 

ions  [116] .

In their analysis of the TET , Ngcezu et al.  [118]  noted  that  the model parameters  𝑝  and  𝑞  in 

Eq.  (28 ) have a dimension of reciprocal dose . In contrast, the  expressions for  𝑝  and  𝑞  derived  in 

[116]  are probabilities, that is, dimensionless  quantities . Since  the parameters  are derived from 

geometr y and the single -track quantity  F2, it is unclear how they relate to absorbed dose.  Ngcezu 

et al. also noted that  the model considers  only one nanometric LIV , that is, a small sub -cellular 

region, wh ile  the original TET model  assumed  OTEs and TTEs to occur  at  the chromosome level .

The y estimated  that there are  at least in the order of 10 3 LIVs in a cell  and showed that the resulting 

modifications to the theory presented in  [116]  results  in  a purely exponential dose dependence 

[118] . However , this  objection is only valid if a cell contains more than one LIV. 

## 5 Fluence -based approaches 

## 5.1  The cluster -dose concept of Faddegon et al. 

The concept of cluster dose was introduced  by  Faddegon et al.  [36]  and builds on  the concept 

of ionization detail . The latter is  a generaliz ation of  nanodosimetric quantities  that were 

introduced by  Ramos -Méndez et al.  [52] , which  were  proposed  for use in treatment planning for 

hadron therapy  [121] . In the original work  on the cluster dose concept  and  follow -up  articles  [122 –

124] , the computational realization was presented as part of the concept.  For clarity , the 

explanation of the concept and its  realization are treated separately  below .

Essentially , cluster dose is defined as the expectation of the weighted sum of ionization 

clusters per mass.  One possible weighting scheme is to assign a weight of unity to  ionization 

clusters  that  contain at least a minimum number of ionizations and a weight of zero  to  cluster s

with fewer ionizations than  this minimum value.  This special case  has been  employed in different 

studies  [122,123,125 –127] , albeit with different  minimum  values,  but  the concept also allows for 

cases where ionization clusters of different complexity have different weights , such as  to account 

for their varying relevance in  inducing biological damage. 

Similar to  absorbed dose , which under conditions of charged particle equilibrium can be 

expressed  as the integral of  the  fluence of charged particles , weighted by the stopping power 

(unrestricted linear energy transfer) , over energy and particle types, cluster dose  𝑔 𝑤  can be 

expressed  by  Eq.  (32 ).

𝑔 𝑤  = 1

𝜌  ∑ ∫ 𝛷 𝑝 ,𝐸 (𝐸 ) ∑ 𝑤 𝜈 

𝑑 𝑁 𝜈 

𝑑𝑥  (𝐸 , 𝑝 )

> 𝜈

𝑑𝐸 

> 𝑝

(32 )

Herein,  𝛷 𝑝 ,𝐸  (𝐸 ) is the spectral fluence of particle type  p (number per area and energy interval), 

𝜈  is the ionization cluster size,  𝑤 𝜈  is the weight associated with an ionization cluster of size  𝜈 , and 

𝑑 𝑁 𝜈 /𝑑𝑥  is the expected number of ionizations produced per pathlength by a particle of type  𝑝  and 

energy  𝐸 . Note  that the term particle type includes the  state of charge , so that  atoms and their 

ions as well as  ions of different charge are considered as distinct particles. 

The weighting factors  𝑤 𝜈  have values between 0 and 1.  Therefore, Eq.  (32 ) is a generic definition 

of a category of quantities  that  depend  not only  on  the choice of weighting factors but also on the 

choice of the considered target volume. The target volume considered in the works of Faddegon 

et al.  [122,123,126]  was a cylinder  with a diameter of 2.3 nm  and  a height of 3.4 nm.  Thomas et al. 

[125]  used spheres of the same volume as this cylinder. Schwarze et al.  [127]  used the approach 26 

of Braunroth et al.  [57]  with a central cylinder and cylinder shell segments of the same volume as 

this cylinder. 

Analogous to absorbed dose, the definition of cluster dose in  Eq.  (32 ) is for a point quantity .

However , for practical purposes , averages over voxels  are  considered.  Additionally , the particle 

fluence is  typically  obtained by simulations (or measurements) as  an  average fluence in energy 

intervals. Therefore, the voxel -average ionization cluster dose  can be expressed  by  Eq.  (33 ).

𝑔 ̅𝑤 (𝑉 𝑥 ) = 1

𝑚  ∑ ∑ ∫ 𝛷 ̅𝑝 ,𝐸 (𝐸 𝑖 )∆𝐸 𝑖 𝑑𝑉  × ∑ 𝑤 𝜈 

𝑑 𝑁 ̅𝜈 

𝑑𝑥  (𝐸 𝑖 , 𝑝 )

> 𝜈 𝑉 𝑥 𝑖 𝑝

(33 )

Here,  𝑉 𝑥  denotes the  volume of the  voxel,  m denotes its mass,  𝐸 𝑖  is the center of  the  ith  energy bin .

The bar superscript on the left -hand side of the equation  denotes  the voxel average, while on the 

right -hand side it denotes the energy bin average. The volume integral of the spectral fluence 

multiplied  by  the energy bin w idth  is  equal  to  the expected total  path length  𝑡 𝑝 (𝐸 𝑖 ) of particles of 

type  p with energies  with in the corresponding energy interval in the voxel. This essentially 

transforms Eq.  (33 ) into the expressions used by Faddegon et al.  [36] , except for the explicit 

representation of cluster weighting used  in  Eq.  (33 ).

The production rate of ionization clusters along path segments of protons and carbon ions was 

first  determined  by Alexander et al.  [66] . They  also studied the synergistic effects of several ions 

within the same voxel  [74] . Ramos -Méndez et al.  created  a comprehensive database for carbon 

ions and the ir  most abundant nuclear fragments  [52] . Braunroth et al.  [57 –60]  developed an 

approach to determine the radial dependence in cylinder coordinates around proton tracks and 

determined an integral quantity named  the  effective cross -section of the track for cluster 

formation  [61] . The ratio of this quantity to the target volume corresponds to the number of 

clusters per pathlength  [55] .

In practical applications, particle fluence in voxels is obtained from condensed history 

simulation s of particle transport  that  consider the average material composition of voxels  with in 

a given  geometry.  However, s ince track structure codes generally only allow simulations in water 

(or a limited combination of water and DNA constituents, as in Geant4 -DNA), the determination 

of the number of clusters per pathlength generally relates to a different material than that  in a 

voxel. Therefore,  Schwarze et al.  [128]  proposed  a density and material scaling approach for the 

quantities  𝑑 𝑁 ̅𝜈  

> 𝑑𝑥

(𝐸 𝑖 , 𝑝 ) and used  it to  determin e cluster dose in carbon ion therapy  [127] .

It is important to emphasize that , although the conversion factors  𝑑 𝑁 ̅𝜈  

> 𝑑𝑥

(𝐸 𝑖 , 𝑝 ) were determined 

by simulations using  randomly distributed  target cylinders in a larger cylinder of dimensions 

corresponding to a chromatin fiber  [52] , the quantity determined is the number of ionization 

clusters per  particle  pathlength  [36] . Therefore, even though the corresponding figures in the 

articles may suggest that spatial filtering to DNA regions was applied, this is not the case .

Therefore , the quantity cluster dose is defined in full analogy to  the  absorbed dose  as described 

above . Thus, scaling of the  number of  clusters produced per pathlength in different materials ,

analogous  to the one introduced to nanodosimetry by Grosswendt  [24] , seems appropriate .

Otherwise the cluster dose would be independent of the material in the voxel  [128] .

Ortiz et al.  [126]  investigated  the  degree of association between  the cl uster dose concept and 

cell survival  considering cluster dose from  ICs of a given minimum number of ionizations  and 

three datasets  from cell  survival  studies.  The underlying nanodosimetric database  was 

constructed from simulations using cylindrical targets  with diameter s of 2.3  nm  and  height s of 27 

3.4  nm  that were  closely packed in cubes of 100  nm side to which per iodic boundary conditions 

were applied for electron tracks  [124] . An optimized energy binning  was  used to  produce  the 

database , ensur ing  that the  relative  variation of the  parameters  𝐹 𝑘  between adjacent  energy 

points  did not exceed  5 %. 

Fig.  9 shows survival data of human kidney cells under heavy ion irradiation under aerobic (top 

row) and hypoxic conditions  (bottom row) . The data were taken from  [129] , and the reported dose 

values were converted  to cluster doses  for different minimum ICS  for each ion type and energy. 

The middle column shows the minimum ICS for which the data for the different ions and the 

corresponding fit curves agree best. The left and right panels show how the picture changes when 

the minimum  ICS  is 1 smaller or larger, respectively. For the  aerobic cell  data shown in the top 

row, the best agreement occurs for a minimum ICS of 5. In contrast,  the best agreement  for the 

hypoxic cell  data in the bottom row  occurs  for a minimum ICS of 7.  

> Fig. 9[129] bottom 12

The degree  to which cell survival is associated  with  cluster dose was assessed  in  [126]  using 

three different statistical metrics , including  the  associated uncertainties . The first  metric  was a 

sliding window approach , which essentially  averaged  survival data and fit values  across  dose 

intervals . The second  metric  was the  mean ratio of absolute  fi t error to the value of the  fit curve at 

each dose. The third  method  was based on  a Bayesian information criterion  from pa ttern 

recognition using neural networks based on the likelihood  concept.  All  metrics  were determined 

using  the  combined  dataset  of all ion types  employed  to  irradiat e the cells , which was fitted to  an 

LQ -model of cell survival as a function of cluster dose . Additionally, the metrics were also 

evaluated separately for  each  ion type.  The variation of the se  three  metrics  with the  minimum ICS       

> 12 Fig. 9reproduced under the CC BY 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) from
> [126] ,merged into a single figure ,adding the labels (a) to (f) . Copyright Ortiz et al. 2025.

28 

used for calculation of the cluster dose  can be seen in  Supplementary Fig.  5. T he rows correspond 

to the different metrics , and the columns  correspond  to  the  datasets o f different cell types and 

oxygenation state s. The minimum , indicating  the  best association , is c onsistent ly found  across 

all metrics  at a cluster dose with ICs of  at least  5 for aerobic cells  and at a cluster dose with ICs 

of  at least  7 for hypoxic cells  (Supplementary Fig.  5). 

In addition,  𝜒 2 values  were determined  for fits to the LQ -model  for the combined dataset of all 

ion types , as well as  for separate fits  to the data of each ion type  (shown as  lines in  Fig.  9).  Fig.  10 

shows t he difference , Δ𝜒 2, between the LQ -fit  to the combined datasets and the sum of the  𝜒 2

values  for the separate fits per ion species . This figure  confirms  the visual impression from  Fig.  9

that , for aerobic cells , the  smallest  Δ𝜒 2 indicating the  best association  for all ion types  is obtained 

with a  cluster dose corresponding to a minimum ICS of 5 , even when different  cell types are 

considered. F or hypoxic  kidney cells and heavy ion irradiation,  Fig.  10  shows  the  smallest  Δ𝜒 2 at 

a minimum ICS of 7.                       

> Fig. 10 :Variation of the difference in the 𝜒 2value between a fit of the data from all ion types to the LQ model
> and the sum of the 𝜒 2values from fit s per ion type .The x-axis of the plots is the minimum number of ions in
> an IC used in the calculation of the cluster dose . The left and middle are results for survival of human kidney
> cells under heavy ion irradiation under aerobic and hypoxic conditions, respectively [129] .The right panel
> is for data of aerobic A549 cells irradiated with protons, helium, carbon and oxygen ions [130] .13

## 5.2  The logistic nanodosimetry model of Dai et al. 

Dai et al.  [53]  developed the logistic nanodosimetry mode l building on the database of Ramos -

Méndez et al.  [52] . Th is  model assumes that the number of lethal lesions produced by direct 

radiation  effects  is proportional to the  number of targets with  an  ICS of  two  or more . For a  cell 

nucleus  in which  𝑁  ionizations  occur , this number is  estimated as  𝐹 2 

> 𝑐

× 𝑁 /𝑀 1 

> 𝑐

, where both  𝑀 1

> 𝑐

and  𝐹 2 

> 𝑐

are defined as fluence averages  defined  according to  Eq.  (5). (Note that Dai et al.  [53]  used 

the notation  𝑃 (𝜈 ) , 𝑀 1 and  𝐹 2 for conditional probabilities and moments. ) The proportionality 

factor , 𝑝 𝐿  , is the probability  that  a true IC  (ICS at least two)  will  re sult in a lethal lesion . It  is 

assumed to  be a function of the conditional mean cluster size  𝑀 1

> 𝑐 2

, calculated  using  Eq.  (2), and 

the conditional probabilities  𝑃 𝜈 

> 𝑐 2

, according to Eq.  (4). The dependence is assumed to be a logistic 

function  with three free parameters  (𝑎 1, 𝑎 2, 𝑎 3) as shown in Eq.  (34 ). The parameters  𝑎 1, 𝑎 2, 𝑎 3

appearing in Eq.  (34 ) are related to th e parameters  𝑘 , 𝑚 0, and  𝑟  used by Dai et al.  by the relations 

𝑎 1 = 1/𝑘 , 𝑎 2 = 𝑒 𝑟 𝑚 0 /𝑘 , 𝑎 3 = 𝑟 .   

> 13 Fig. 10 reproduced under the CC BY 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) from
> [126] , copyright Ortiz et al. 2024.

29 

𝑝 𝐿 (𝑀 1

> 𝑐 2

) = (𝑎 1 + 𝑎 2𝑒 −𝑎 3𝑀 1

> 𝑐 2

)−1 (34 )

Additionally , it is assumed that  all ICs  (including those of ICS of 1)  that do not result in a lethal 

lesion  constitute sub -lethal lesions  and that there is a constant probability of any  pair of these 

sub -lethal  lesions  combin ing  to  produce  a lethal lesion.  This probability , 𝑝 𝑠𝑙 , is a fourth model 

parameter  and  is twice the parameter  𝑃 𝑠 →𝑙  used by Dai et al. , who omitted the  necessary  division 

by  two  to obtain the number of pairs  in their Eq.  (14) .

The  model  also  assum es  that the number of ionizations in a cell nucleus is Poisson distributed 

and can be related to the  specific energy using a constant mean energy  per ion ization , 𝑊 . Using 

the se  model assumptions,  the parameters  𝛼  and  𝛽  of the LQ model can be  expressed  as given in 

Eqs.  (35 ) and  (36 ):

𝛼  = [𝐹 2

> 𝑐

𝑝 𝐿 (𝑀 1

> 𝑐 2

) − 𝑝 𝑠𝑙 

2 (1 − 𝐹 2

> 𝑐

𝑝 𝐿 (𝑀 1

> 𝑐 2

)) + 𝑝 𝑠𝑙 

2𝑀 1 

> 𝑐

(1 − 𝐹 2

> 𝑐

𝑝 𝐿 (𝑀 1

> 𝑐 2

))2

] × 𝑑 𝑐 −1 (35 )

𝛽  = 𝑝 𝑆𝐿 

2 (1 − 𝐹 2

> 𝑐

𝑝 𝐿 (𝑀 1

> 𝑐 2

))2

× 𝑑 𝑐 −2 (36 )

The quantity  𝑑 𝑐  is  the average contribution to  the  absorbed dose  from the energy imparted to a 

nanometric  target volume  that  receiv es  at least one ionization . It is  given by Eq.  (37 ), where  𝑊 𝑖  is 

the mean energy imparted per ionization , 𝑀 1 

> 𝑐

is the  conditional  mean ICS 14 , and  𝜌  and  𝑉  are the 

mass density and  volume of the cell nucleus , respectively .

𝑑 𝑐  = 𝑊 𝑖 𝑀 1

> 𝑐

𝜌𝑉  (37 )

A later  development  of the logistic  nanodosimetry model  [54]  used  the approach of Garty et al. 

[93]  for connecting ionizations and DNA strand breaks  (Eqs.  (12 ) and  (13 )), employing  the value 

𝑝 𝑠  = 0.15  from  [97]  and an upper limit  of 10  for the summation in  Eq.  (12 ), as in the work of 

Casiraghi et al.  [67] . Addition ally , it is assumed that a DSB  doe s not nece ssarily lead to a lethal 

event. 

The probability  𝑝 ̂𝐿  of a DSB result ing  in a lethal lesion is assumed to be a  function of the mean 

ICS , 𝑀 1

> 𝑐

, calculated with the  conditional probabilities of Eq.  (3). This function is  given by Eq.  (34 )

after substitution of  𝑝 ̂𝐿  for  𝑝 𝐿  and  𝑀 1 

> 𝑐

for  𝑀 2

> 𝑐

. The same substitutions  also apply to the formulas 

for  𝛼  and  𝛽  (Eq s. (35 ) and  (36 )). However , Yang et al.  [54]  only keep the first term in the brackets 

of  Eq.  (35 ), which corresponds to DNA lesions  due  to direct effects only.  The reason for this 

simplification is  twofold. First,  unlike  the work of Dai et al.  [53] , it is not assumed that the number 

of ionizations follows a Poisson distribution . Second , the number of indirect lesions  (formed by 

combinations of two sub -lethal lesions) is  assumed  to be  proportional to the square of the 

number of sublethal lesions ( see  Eq.  (11) in  [54] ).  This second assumption  implies that a sub -

lethal lesion  could  “interact ” with itself  to form a lethal lesion , which appears paradoxical. Th is 

inconsistency must be considered as a caveat of the modified logistic nanodosimetric model. 

## 5.3  The model of radiation action based on nanodosimetry of Schneider et al. 

The model of radiation action based on  nanodosimetry , as  proposed by Schneider et al.  [69] ,

was essentially  a reformulation of the TET with some developments. The fundamental model 

equation for the survival rate  is given by  Eq.  (28 ), wh ere  the terms  𝑞𝐷  and  𝑝𝐷  are  replaced  by  the        

> 14 Note that Dai et al. [53] used the notation 𝑃 (𝜈 ),𝑀 1and 𝐹 2for conditional probabilities and moments.

30 

mean numbers  of unrepaired 15  sublethal lesions (SLs) and clustered lesions (CLs) , denoted by 

𝑛 ̅𝑆𝐿  and  𝑛 ̅ 𝐶𝐿 , respectively. A lesion  wa s assumed to be a DNA DSB and  assumed to be  equivalent 

to an IC of  two  or more in a spherical BIV  with a diameter  of 2.5  nm. A CL is assumed to  be two or 

more DSBs produced by a single track in a sphere  with a diameter of  between 3  nm and 10  nm ,

called the cluster -lesion volume (CLV). An SL is one DSB in a CLV. A pair of SLs formed by one or 

more tracks  in different CLVs  is called  a distant lesion, where the two SLs potentially interact. 

The mean number  of unrepaired CLs , 𝑛 ̅ 𝐶𝐿 , is related to particle fluence  𝛷  by Eq.  (38 ).

𝑛 ̅ 𝐶𝐿  = 𝛷  × 𝜎 ∗ × 𝑝 𝐶𝐿  (38 )

The free  parameter  𝜎 ∗ = 𝜎  × (1 − 𝑅 𝐶𝐿 ) of the model  is  called “intersection -cross -section”  and is 

defined such that  𝛷  × 𝜎  is the probability of a particle track to intersect any of the CLVs in a cell 

nucleus 16 . The term  𝑅 𝐶𝐿  is the probability of repair ing  a CL 15 , and  𝑝 𝐶𝐿  is the probability of a track 

passing  through  the CLV to produce  a CL. The mean number  of SLs , 𝑛 ̅𝑆𝐿 , is assumed to be given 

by  Eq.  (39 ).

𝑛 ̅𝑆𝐿  = 𝛷  × 𝜎 ∗ × 1

8 × (1 − 𝑅 𝑆𝐿 ) × 𝑝 𝑆𝐿  (39 )

The factor 1/8 was  empirically  determined by comparin g the ratio of persistent simple and 

complex DSBs  in  radiobiological data  (Appendix A of  [69] ), assuming two DSBs per CL.  𝑅 𝑆𝐿  is  the 

dose -rate dependent (fast) repair probability of SLs  and  is assumed to converge to zero  at  high 

dose rate s.

The relation ship  between particle fluence , 𝛷 , and dose , 𝐷 , is given by Eq.  (40 ), w here  𝑑 𝐵𝐼𝑉  is 

the diameter of the BIV,  𝜌  is the mass density,  𝑀 1 is the mean ICS and  𝑊 𝑖  is the mean energy 

imparted per ionization .

𝛷  = 2

3 × 𝑑 𝐵𝐼𝑉  × 𝐷𝜌 

𝑀 1𝑊 𝑖 

(40 )

The probabilities of CLs and SLs were related to nanodosimetry  under the  assum ption  that the 

probabilities of BIVs receiv ing  an ICS of  two  or more are statistically independent , and that the 

mean number  of BIVs traversed by a track , 𝑛 , is  equal to  the ratio of the mean chord length of the 

CLV  to  the diameter of the BIV.  When  the diameter of the CLV is chosen s o that  𝑛  is  an integer, 

these two probabilities can be calculated from the binomial distribution,  yielding  Eqs.  (41 ) and 

(42 ).

𝑝 𝐶𝐿  = 1 − (1 − 𝐹 2)𝑛  − 𝑝 𝑆𝐿  (41 )

𝑝 𝑆𝐿  = 𝑛 𝐹 2(1 − 𝐹 2)𝑛 −1 (42 )

Since low -energy photons were considered as  the  primary radiation in  [69] , the  track -averages 

of the nanodosimetric probabilities  𝐹 2 were used in Eqs.  (41 ) and  (42 ). These averages were 

determined  in  a two -step procedure.  First , the energy dependence of  𝐹 2 was determined for 

electrons with initial energies between 10  eV and 1  MeV. In the second step,  the  spectral fluence 

of electrons was determined from track -length distributions obtained by transport simulations of 

initially monoenergetic electrons with energies equal to the mean energy of secondary electrons                    

> 15 This is not stated explicitly in [69] . However, including ”cell specific parameters … [such as] phase in cell
> cycle, radioresistance, repopulation and repair capability” in parameter 𝜎 ∗(written as 𝜎 in [69] ) suggests
> that this was intended . We believe the model is clearer when cell -specific factors are explicitly included in
> the repair probability 𝑅 𝐶𝐿 .
> 16 Schneider et al. write “any BIV in the cell nucleus” [69] , but this appears to be a typo given that CLs and
> SLs refer to the CLV.

31 

produced by the interaction of monoenergetic photons with energies between 280  eV and 8  keV 

or by 250  kV x -rays or  137 Cs or  60 Co gamma radiation. 

The doses for survival levels of 0.1 and 0.9 were determined  by inver ting  the model  function ,

and RBE predictions were obtained using  60 Co as the reference radiation.  A c omparison of the 

prediction for  CLV  diameters  corresponding  to  𝑛  = 1, … ,4 BIV diameters per mean chord length 

with experimental data showed best agreement when  𝑛  was 2. 

The model with  𝑛  = 2 and  𝑅 𝑆𝐿  = 0 was fitted to six radiobiological datasets  of  cell survival as a 

function of dose . This  yield ed  values  for  the parameter  𝜎 ∗ that  correspon d to circles  with 

diameter s between 5  μm and 8  μm , depending on the cell type and phase  of  the  cell cycle. 

In their analysis of the TET and derived models, Ngcezu et al.  [118]  pointed out that Eqs.  (41 )

and  (42 ) result ed  from the  model assumptions of statistical independence of IC formation in 

neighboring targets . However, this assumption  contradict s the  conceptual  definition of  tracks  as 

collections of statistically corre la ted energy transfer points  [131] . For proton tracks with 

projectile energies between 1  MeV and 100  MeV,  Ngcezu et al.  showed that only about 25  % of 

the ICs in spherical BIVs  with a diameter  of 3  nm are produced by primary particles traversing the 

BIV.  Addition ally , they demonstrated  that for  a proton  fluence corresponding to a dose of 2  Gy, 

the probability of an IC in a BIV is in the order of magnitude 10 -6-10 -5, making  the probability  𝑝 𝐶𝐿 

according to Eq.  (41 ) negligibly small.                

> Fig. 11 :Multi -event (ME) distributions of cluster volumes (diameter of 12 nm) inside a spherical region with
> aradius of 6 μm that receive a single DSB (squares) or two or more DSBs (circles) from protons of (a) 3 MeV
> and (b) 50 MeV energy. The data applies to a particle fluence corresponding to an absorbed dose of 2 Gy
> and a constant probability of 0.01 that an IC is converted to a DSB. The solid lines are Poisson distributions
> with the same expectation as the data shown by symbols. 17

Ngcezu et al.  [118]  suggested that a model in the spirit of the TET  must  consider IC formation 

in tracks on the micrometer scale. Th ey  demonstrated  this  by first scoring ICs in the polyhedral 

unit cells of a  face -centered cubic  Bravais lattice  with  the same volume as the BIV . T hen  they 

scored  clusters of BIVs with ICs in unit cells with the volume of the CV. The resulting frequency    

> 17 Fig. 11 reproduced under the CC BY 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) from
> [118] , Copyright Ngcezu and Rabus (2021).

32 

distributions of CVs containing a single BIV with IC S of at least two  and multiple BIVs with IC S of 

at least two , respectively, were not Poisson distributed. The estimated number of CVs with a 

single IC or multiple ICs at a fluence corresponding to a dose of 2  Gy in a cell nucleus of 6  μm 

diameter was estimated to be thousands of times  greater  than the number of DSBs typically 

observed  in radiobiological experiments. 

This discrepancy  can be  explained by the fact that only a small proportion of the matter in a cell 

nucleus is DNA. Assuming a uniform distribution of true DNA targets in the cell nucleus covering 

1 % of the nucleus volume and using this value for the success probability of a bin omial 

distribution, the frequency distribution of single and multiple DSBs in spherical cluster volumes 

was obtained. Examples are shown in  Fig.  11 (a) and (b) for a dose of 2  Gy produced by  proton 

irradiation  at  an  energy  of 3  MeV and 50  MeV, respectively. The results indicate that  Poisson 

distribution can be  applicable  to  less densely ionizing radiation but  not to  more densely ionizing 

radiation. 

## 6 Discussion  and conclusions 

## 6.1  Commonalities among the models 

The models presented in the previous three sections  are based on different approaches.  From 

an abstract mathematical perspective,  they  all implicit ly  assum e that radi ation effects can be 

described by  one or more  nanodosimetric  parameters , 𝑞 𝑛  , which can be  obtained from ICS 

distributions  by  applying  the  corresponding  weighting  factors , 𝑤 𝑛 ,𝜈 , to the ICS probabilities  𝑃 𝜈 

(Eq.  (43 )) or  weighting factors  𝑤 𝑛 ,𝜈  

> 𝑐

to the conditional ICS probabilities  𝑃 𝜈 

> 𝑐

.

𝑞 𝑛 (𝑄 , 𝜃 𝑠 , 𝜃 𝑏 ) = ∑ 𝑤 𝑛 ,𝜈 (𝜃 𝑠 , 𝜃 𝑏 , 𝜃 𝑚 )𝑃 𝜈 (𝑄 , 𝜃 𝑠 , 𝜃 𝑏 )

> ∞
> 𝜈 =1

(43 )

Some approaches  use  instead the  conceptually  equivalent  method  of applying  weighting factors 

𝑊 𝑛 ,𝑘  to the complementary  cumulative  ICS probabilities  𝐹 𝑘  (Eq.  (44 )) or weighting factors  𝑊 𝑛 ,𝑘  

> 𝑐

to 

the conditional complementary cumulative ICS probabilities  𝐹 𝑘 

> 𝑐

.

𝑞 𝑛 (𝑄 , 𝜃 𝑠 , 𝜃 𝑏 ) = ∑ 𝑊 𝑛 ,𝑘 (𝜃 𝑠 , 𝜃 𝑏 , 𝜃 𝑚 )𝐹 𝑘 (𝑄 , 𝜃 𝑠 , 𝜃 𝑏 )

> ∞
> 𝑘 =1

(44 )

The parameters  𝑞 𝑛  depend on the radiation quality  𝑄 , a set of parameters  𝜃 𝑠  characterizing the 

target volume (size) , and a set of parameters  𝜃 𝑏  characterizing the irradiation geometry . The ICS 

probabilities  𝑃 𝜈  and  𝐹 𝑘  also depend  on these three parameters, while the weighting factors  𝑤 𝑛 ,𝜈 

and  𝑊 𝑛 ,𝑘  are assumed to be independent of the radiation quality  but may depend on  the  model -

specific parameters .

Examples of choices of such weighting factors are listed in  Table  1. For instance , in the  model 

of Grosswendt  [42,77,78]  the  weighting factors related to DSB formation are  simply  𝑤 𝑛 ,𝜈  = 0 for 

𝜈  = 1 and  𝑤 𝑛 ,𝜈  = 1 for  𝜈  ≥ 2. In the  approach of Mietelska et al.  [46] , the weighting factors  𝑤 𝑛 ,𝜈 

are cumulative probabilities of  a binomial distribution with success parameter  𝑝 𝑠  (Eq.  (22 )). This 

success parameter  corresponds to  the model -specific parameter  𝜃 𝑚 .

Although  the parameters  𝑞 𝑛  are weighted linear combinations of nanodosimetric probabilities, 

the actual model is  often  non -linear in these parameters , for instance, in Eq.  (18 ).33 

Another  categorization  of the  presented  models is that some  are mechanistic  while others are 

mechanism -agnostic. The mechanistic models  often come with strong  heuristic  hypotheses 

such as the  assumption  made in  [42,69,77,78,115,116,119]  that an IC of size  two  or  greater 

corresponds to  a DSB . This assumption implies that  the model  only  consider s direct radiation 

damage  and  considers  DNA damage due to reaction of radicals formed by water radiolysis  to be 

negligible  or irrelevant .

## 6.2  Mechanistic models 

As demonstrated  in  Fig.  3, mechanistic models  make  predictions that reproduce experimental 

data, even  when  they contain model assumptions such as that the probabilities of an IC of two or 

larger and of formation of a DSB  being equal. These assumption  have been argued to lack 

plausibility  [89,94,118] . For some  models , the agreement between  the  model  prediction  and 

radiobiological data is related to adjust ing  one or more free parameters external to 

nanodosimetry. In the work of Garty et al.  [92,93] , e.g., this  free parameter is  the conversion 

Table  1: Examples  of weighting factors used in different models for parameters determined according to 

Eqs.  (43 ) or  (44 ). (𝑝 𝑆𝑆𝐵  and  𝑝 𝐷𝑆𝐵  are predicted probability of induction of a single and a double strand break, 

respectively;  𝑝 𝑐𝐷𝑆𝐵  and  𝑝 𝑠𝐷𝑆𝐵  are predicted probability of  a complex  and simple  double strand break, 

respectively;  𝜎 𝛼  and  𝜎 5%  are inactivation cross sections  at low dose and at 5  % survival rate , respectively ;

𝑔 𝑤  is cluster dose,  𝑞 1 and  𝑞 2 are radiation quality factors,  𝐷 3−10  

> 𝑄

is the nanodosimetry -weighted dose, and 

𝛿 𝑖 ,𝑗  is the Kronecker symbol, i.e., unity if the two indices agree and else zero.) 

author(s)  quantity  weighting factors in Eqs.  (43 ) or  (44 ) conditions 

Casiraghi  [61]  𝑝 𝑠𝐷𝑆𝐵  𝑊 1,𝑘  = 𝛿 𝑘 ,2 − 𝛿 𝑘 ,4 -

𝑝 𝑐𝐷𝑆𝐵  𝑊 2,𝑘  = 𝛿 𝑘 ,4 − 𝛿 𝑘 ,11  -

Conte  [93]  ‡ 𝜎 𝛼  𝑊 1,𝑘  = 𝑐 1𝛿 𝑘 ,2 + 𝑐 2𝛿 𝑘 ,3 aerobic 

𝑊 1,𝑘  = 𝑐 3𝛿 𝑘 ,3 + 𝑐 4𝛿 𝑘 ,4 hypoxic 

𝜎 5%  𝑊 2,𝑘  = 𝑐 5𝛿 𝑘 ,2 + 𝑐 6𝛿 𝑘 ,3 aerobic 

𝑊 2,𝑘  = 𝛿 𝑘 ,3 hypoxic 

Grosswendt  [38]  𝑝 𝑆𝑆𝐵  𝑤 1,𝜈  = 𝛿 𝜈 ,1 -

𝑝 𝐷𝑆𝐵  𝑤 2,𝜈  = 1 − 𝛿 𝜈 ,1 − 𝛿 𝜈 ,2 -

Garty  [85]  𝑝 𝐷𝑆𝐵  𝑤 1,𝜈  = 1 − 2 (1 − 𝑝 𝑠 

2 )

> 𝜈

+ (1 − 𝑝 𝑠 )𝜈  -

𝑝 𝑐𝐷𝑆𝐵  𝑤 2,𝜈  = 𝑤 1,𝜈  − (𝜈 

2) 𝑝 𝑠 2

2 (1 − 𝑝 𝑠 )𝜈 −2 -

Mietelska  [42]  𝜎 5%  𝑤 1,𝜈  = 1 − (1 − 𝑝 𝑠 )𝜈  − 𝑝 𝑠 𝜈 (1 − 𝑝 𝑠 )𝜈 −1 𝜈  ≥ 2

Ortiz  [116]  𝑔 𝑤  𝑊 1,𝑘  = 𝛿 𝑘 ,5 aerobic 

𝑊 1,𝑘  = 𝛿 𝑘 ,7 hypoxic 

Schneider  [63]  𝑝 𝐷𝑆𝐵  𝑊 2,𝑘  = 𝛿 𝑘 ,2 -

Schulte  [32]  𝑞 1 𝑊 1,𝑘  = 𝛿 𝑘 ,2 − 𝛿 𝑘 ,6 -

𝑞 2 𝑊 2,𝑘  = 𝛿 𝑘 ,6 − 𝛿 𝑘 ,11  -

Yang  [73]  𝐷 3−10  

> 𝑄

𝑊 1,𝑘  = 𝛿 𝑘 ,3 − 𝛿 𝑘 ,11  - 

> ‡

The coefficients  𝑐 1, … , 𝑐 6 are between 0 and 1 and depend on the cell type. 34 

probability between an ionization in the target volume and the occurrence of a strand break or a 

base damage. In the TET and the model of Schneider et al.  [69] , the probability of repair of a DSB 

is another example of such  an  auxiliary model parameter. 

Other mechanistic nanodosimetric models appear to lack such additional parameters. 

However, closer inspection reveals that there are implicit (fixed) parameters which have been 

intentionally or unintentionally chosen to yield agreement  of  model prediction s with 

radiobiological reference data.  Fig.  3 illustrate s one example of this. The nanodosimetric 

parameters used in the model prediction were derived from a simulation using a beam size twice 

the size of  the target volume  in both transversal dimensions. If a pencil beam pass ing  the target 

centrally w ere  used instead, the model  would  not reproduce the radiobiological data 18  . This 

indicates that the choice of irradiation conditions and beam size is an implicit parameter of the 

model that was used to produce the predictions shown in  Fig.  3.

It is worth emphasizing that among the mechanistic models, only that of Garty et al.  [92,93] 

genuinely  includes indirect radiation effects. Arguments about radical recombination have also 

been used in  [35]  and  [67] . However, the target cylinder diameter considered  is  2 nm , which is the 

lateral  diameter of DNA double strands. Therefore,  unlike  the model of Garty et al.,  these 

approaches do not consider  radicals formed outside the volume occupied by DNA and reacting 

with the DNA molecule after diffusion. 

## 6.3  Mechanism -agnostic models 

Mechanism -agnostic models  contain adjustable parameters that  can be used to fit the model 

to  radiobiological assays.  A question  that can  be  answered in this way  is  the following: F or which 

site diameter  𝜃 𝑠 , and which  set of weighting factors  𝑤 𝑛 ,𝜈 , applied to  ICS distributions obtained in 

spherical targets passed centrally by the primary particle , is there  the best fit  to  experimental data 

for inactivation cross sections  [45,47,100,101] ? Another question  is : For which set of weighting 

factors  𝑤 𝑛 ,𝜈 , applied to ICS distributions obtained in cylindrical targets  with a diameter of 2.3 nm 

and  a height of 3.4 nm  with the irradiation geometry considered in  [36] , is there  the best fit  to  cell 

survival data  [126] ?

However , the fact that  some of the mechanism -agnostic models use  ICS probabilities in 

targets corresponding to short DNA segments (e.g.  in  the cluster -dose approach) does not mean 

that these models  also  neglect indirect effects. This is because no assumption is made as to 

where the IC s are formed. The  ICs  can be formed in DNA or in the  surrounding  mediu m. The refore, 

the  concern  that  assuming  radiation effects in a single target  to  determine  the fate of a cell 

appears implausible  [3]  is not valid  for the model used in  [45,47,99] . This is because the critique 

implicit ly  assum es  that the models are mechanistic, while they are not. 

Similar to  the conventional LQ model of cell survival, t he mechanism -agnostic models  linking 

nan odosimetry and  biological radiation effects  do not explain  why the observed dependencies 

are found.  Their  contribution to  radiation physics  is that they  tak e into account  the microscopic 

stochasticity of radiation action , enabl ing  new possibilities for  optimization of  ion beam 

treatment planning  [67,122] , for example .

It is not contradictory that different approaches identify different minim al  ICS s as being best 

correlated with biological results. For example,  Conte et al.  [101]  found  the  best correlation 

between nanodosimetry and biological effects  using  the  nanodosimetric probabilities  𝐹 3 and  𝐹 2  

> 18 Private communication by Pavel Kundrát ,email on April 13, 2026.

35 

for aerobic  cells  and  𝐹 4 and  𝐹 3 for hypoxic cells.  In contrast, Ortiz et al.  [126]  reported  the  best 

association between cell survival and probabilities  𝐹 5 for aerobic cells and  𝐹 7 for hypoxic cells. 

In fact, these two approaches  differ greatly  in  the nanodosimetric quantity considered.  In the 

work of  Conte et al.  [45,47,99 –101] , a single nanometric target  traversed centrally by an ideal 

pencil  beam  is considered . In the cluster  dose  approach , all  possible nanometric target volumes 

of  a given size and shape are taken into account , regardless  of whether they represent a sensitive 

volume  with in a cell.  Addition ally , the first  approach sought  an optim al  target size , while  the target 

geometry was fixed  in the second  approach . Both approaches (and variants thereof , such as that 

of Mietelska  et al.  [46] ) allow  identification of nanodosimetry -based parameters that provide an 

optim al  fit  of the model  to radiobiological data.  Since  the models do not include a mechanistic 

interpretation,  it is not  possib le  to  select one as being better than the others.  All mechanism -

agnostic  nanodosimetry -based  models  achieve the primary aim of providing  radiation  quantities 

that  significantly reduce differences  in  the effects of different radiation  types .

## 6.4  Open issues 

## 6.4.1  Understanding  the performance of  mechanism -agnostic  models 

From a heuristic point of view, it would be more satisf ying  to understand  why mechanism -

agnostic approaches succeed in reproducing experimental data  despite their different 

fundamentals . This would require  an  understanding  of  the causal relationship between 

nanodosimetric quantities  and  site sizes and irradiation conditions.  One  preliminary step could 

be  to explore which ICS yields best agreement with experiments  when  the cluster dose on the  x-

axis of  Fig.  9 was determined using the nanodosimetric probabilities determined for the target 

sizes and irradiation conditions used  by  Conte et al.  [101] . More generally , it would be interesting 

to investigate the full variability of nanodosimetric quantities  as a function of all influencing 

parameters.  For  instance , the impact of the distribution of impact parameters has only been 

studied for a few possible choices  [52,57] . Similarly, most studies  have  used  cylinders of different 

dimensions and aspect ratios (e.g.  [42,45,46,67,77,92,97] ) or spheres (e.g.  [100,101,125] ) as 

target volumes. However, less common geometries , such as cylinder shell segments  [57,61,75] 

or (almost spherical) dodecahedrons  [118] , were  also  employed. 

How ICS distributions vary with the shape of the target volume has only been investigated  for  a

few  select cases  so far : sphere s and cylinder s of the same diameter and height equal as the 

sphere diameter  [24] , and  cylinder shell segments  with  different aspect ratios  [57] . The 

computationally efficient associated volume clustering approach from microdosimetry  [132]  has 

also been used in a few nanodosimetric studies  [55,125,133] . When used with spherical targets, 

this scoring approach offers the benefit of mathematical rigor  [55] . Its extension to cylindrical 

target volume  remains  a challenge. 

## 6.4.2  Correlation models with pairs of targets 

Radiobiological studies suggest that biological  effectiveness depend s on processes occurring 

on several length scales  [134,135] , as  previously proposed  in microdosimetry  [136 –138] . Th us, 

the interaction  between ICs , as considered in the TET -based models , may be another  factor  to be 

considered in  nanodosimetry -based  radiation effect models  aiming at correlations . Ngcezu et al. 

[118]  employed a method akin to  hierarchical clustering  to  scor e ICs in  distinct  targets . They  only 

applied  their approach  to  the  model geometry  used  by Schneider et al.  [69] , but  exten ding it  to 36 

other geometries  appears straightforward . Thus , databases for generaliz ed  nanodosimetric 

concepts could be created , pertain ing  to  quantities such as the number of clusters of ICs formed 

per  primary particle  path  length . However, fl uence -weighting will be more intricate , as  there may 

be  interference between ICs formed by different particles in the same track , as suggested  by 

some TET models.  Machine learning -based approaches may be useful in generatin g the 

corresponding databases. 

## 6.4.3  Understanding radiobiological effectiveness from nanodosimetry 

The development of nanodosimetry and radiation effect models using nanodosimetric  track 

structure  features was initially driven by the urge to better understand the fundamental principles 

behind biological radiation effects. Sophisticated track structure codes  can  simulat e radiation 

effects across all stages , from physical interactions  and  radiolysis  to  chemical reactions  and 

biological consequences. However, these intricate simulations tend to have a black -box 

character.  Furthermore , they do not inform the  development of physical detectors  to  measur e

radiation properties relevant  to  the biological outcome. 

Mechanistic models  that  predict radiation effects from nanodosimetric quantities  aim  to 

address this issue . These models try  to use only a minimum set of quantities and free parameters. 

As  previously mentione d, a common approach was to fix certain implicit parameters, such as the 

target size, based on heuristic considerations. In  Garty et al. ’s  work, the contribution of radical 

species contributing to DNA damage was somewhat mixed with the direct effects in that a joint 

parameter describing the probability  of an ionization to result in a DNA strand break was used. 

The rationale was to  minimize  the number of model parameters. 

As  was  shown with the  TET  and derived models, the applicability of some of the model 

assumptions can be tested using simulations  [118] . Similarly, machine learning approaches ha ve 

been used in conjunction with simulations to inform optimal parameter choices  [111] . However, 

these examples are only  the  first steps for  the  further development of mechanistic models based 

on nanodosimetry. Machine learning approaches could also be used to determine weighting 

approaches  that  are  more general  than  those shown in Eqs.  (43 ) and  (44 ).

For instance, weighting -function  estimates  could be determined  considering the relevance of 

different target sizes  to  account for radical  contributions  and their diffusion.  Data for training 

these models could be produced using  adapted  simulation tools for the chemistry phase . These 

tools  would have to be  employed in a way that allows parameters  to be  extract ed  for the 

contribution of ICs  that  produc e only radicals or  that  only partly overlap with DNA segments. This 

would refin e the model of Garty without introducing too many additional free parameters. 

## 6.4.4  Uncertainties 

A major  caveat  of  all  models  presented  is  that they rely on simulations. Several studies  have 

revealed large  disparities of results obtained using different track structure codes for electron 

transport  [139 –142] . A recent systematic analysis indicated that the results for the probability  𝐹 2

in spherical targets with  a diameter of 8  nm produced by 50  eV electrons had a relative standard 

deviation of 34  % among different codes . Using the same total cross -sections in all codes 

reduced the standard deviation at 50  eV to about 7  %. However, disparities at larger electron 

energies were only slightly  reduced  by  this substitution of cross -section data  [141] . Furthermore ,

the common cross -section datasets were only  establish ed  ad -hoc  to  study  the impact of total 

cross -sections on nanodosimetric re sults . There was no  claim  that  this dataset (and the results 37 

produced with  them ) were  most realistic.  One  might  expect the discrepancies between codes  to 

be smaller for  ion beam  simulations , as a  significant portion of  ionization s originat e from  ion 

interactions.  For instance, Rabus  et al. reported  a difference of  about 10  % between the number 

of targets with ionizations  in proton beam s with energies between 1  MeV and 100  MeV  for 

different options  of Geant4 -DNA  [55] . Nevertheless, a thorough  investigation of the uncertainty 

coming from different codes for ion beam  application s is lacking. 

## 6.4.5  Re considering  the scaling relation 

The scaling relation underlying nanodosimetry (see Appendix A) was initially  put forth to 

address the equivalence of ICS distributions  in  gas -phase  experiments and  corresponding targets 

in liquid water . However, in  irradiation scenarios  where  the  majority of primary particle 

trajectories do not intersect the  nanometric target , the  rationale behind the scaling relation may 

be questioned. Furthermore,  the  theoretical considerations  [42,107]  on  the analogy between the 

compound Poisson process leading to ICS distributions  and the microdosimetric multi -event 

distribution ha ve their  caveats  (see Appendix A) . In particular,  this analogy  may be limited to 

cases  in which the ICs are predominantly  produced through  primary particle  interactions , as  with 

the small target sizes used in  [101] . The  cluster dose concept  introduces  an additional 

complication  because  the simulations establishing the particle fluence  are performed in 

condensed -history mode  with  material compositions  that  differ from pure water . Schwarze et al. 

proposed  a first approach to adapt the scaling relation to this situation  [128] . It would be 

conceptually simpl e,  albeit potentially tedious , to  systematically  study the relation between ICs 

in different materials  for  a wide  range of impact parameters  using  track structure  simulations  with 

different target sizes.  Analy zing  such a large dataset would certainly be nefit machine learning. 

## 6.4.6  Compact nanodosimeters 

Conventional nanodosimeters are  comparatively complex instruments.  In a proof -of -principle 

experiment,  Hilgers et al. demonstrated  that it is possible to perform measurements with a 

nanodosimeter in the mixed radiation field of a therapeutic carbon ion beam  [72] . The  potential 

future use of nanodosimeters in clinical practice  to  validat e simulation -based nanodosimetric 

quantities used in treatment planning  necessitates  novel , more  compact  detector designs . The 

feasibility of such compact  nanodosimeters has  already been  demonstrated  [20] . However, t he 

most recent developments in this regard  indicate  a major  technolog ical challenge in 

distinguishing individual ions in an IC  during  the measurement  process  [21,143] . In these 

detectors,  an electron avalanche is produced in a gas electron multiplier setup , and the  duration 

of the avalanche  interferes with the arrival time distribution of the ions to be detected . Addressing 

this challenge  may require  reconsider ing  nanodosimetric  measurement  concepts . F or instance, 

one could use  information  about  the temporal  pattern  of the recorded signal.  This  could entail 

novel weighting functions for the different ICSs  that have not  yet  been considered in the proposed 

models. However , as discussed in Section  6.1 , the generic features of the models enable 

adaption  to these potential new nanodosimetric measurement quantities. 

## Appendix A  The scaling relation underlying nanodosimetry 

The  conditions for the equivalence  of nanodosimetric ICS distribution  for  different materials 

and densities  were  first studied by  Grosswendt and Pszona  [39]  for 4.6  MeV alpha particles in 38 

nitrogen and water and by  Grosswendt  [15]  considering  tracks of  5 MeV  alpha particle s and 

electrons  with energies below 10  keV  in  propane  and water . The approach was  formalized  in 

further  work by  Grosswendt  [40]  and extended  to also consider the non -ideal detection efficiency 

of nanodosimetric counters  by Grosswendt et al.  [41,42] . It is hypothesized  that the ICS 

distribution is  a unique function of the mean ICS  𝑀 1. The  equivalence of the ICS distributions is 

thus  obtained if  the same  𝑀 1 is  produced  in  targets of different materials and densities . The 

relation ship  between  the  corresponding target sizes  can then be expressed  by Eq.  (45 ).

(𝐷 𝑠 𝜌 )(2) = (𝐷 𝑠 𝜌 )(1) × (𝜆 𝑖 𝜌 )(2)

(𝜆 𝑖 𝜌 )(1) × 𝑚 1

> (1)

((𝑑𝜌 )(1))

𝑚 1

> (2)

((𝑑𝜌 )(2)) × 𝜂 (1)

𝜂 (2) (45 )

The superscripts  denote  the material . 𝐷 𝑠  denote s the diameter of the target volume , 𝜌  represents 

the mass density,  𝜆 𝑖  is the mean free path for  ionization  by the primary particle . The quantity  𝑚 1

is the mean number of ionizations produced in the target per ionizing interaction of the primary 

particle  in  it . This quantity  depends on the impact parameter  𝑑  of the primary particle with respect 

to the  center of the target volume  (i.e., the distance between the  two lines in  Fig.  1). The  quantity 

𝜂  is the  average  detection efficiency  for the registration of ions produced in the target volume of 

a nanometric detector. 

It  is important to  note  that  the product  𝜆 𝑖 𝜌  is independent  of  density , since it is given by the 

equation  𝜆 𝑖 𝜌  = 𝑀 𝑚 /𝜎 𝑖 , where  𝑀 𝑚  is the molecular mass and  𝜎 𝑖  is the ionization cross section .

Consequently , Eq.  (45 ) is  an expression for density scaling of the linear dimensions  𝐷 𝑠  and  𝑑 ,

corrected for the different  cross -sections for  ionizations by the primary particle and secondary 

electrons .

The scaling relation is generally used to establish the  water -equivalent  diameter of the target 

volume of a nanodosimeter  [44] . In this context,  the simplifying assumption is  frequently  made 

that the  gain  factor  𝑚 1 from the interactions  by  secondary electrons  is almost the same for 

different materials . Similarly, as long as  the  quantity of interest is  the frequency distribution of IC s

produced by the radiation in a material and not that of  the ions detected  in a concrete 

nanodosimeter, the last factor in Eq.  (45 ) is also often neglected. 

It is worth noting that the  derivation of  Eq.  (45 ) is based on  a theoretical description of  the 

synergistic generation of ionizations in a target volume by the primary particle and its secondary 

electrons in a  compound  Poisson process  [42,107] . In analogy  to the  approach used in 

microdosimetr y for the construction of multi -event  distributions from  single -event distribution s, 

the ICS distribution  is conceived as  the  weighted  superposition of the  contributions  of multiple 

ionizing interactions of the primary particle along a  “relevant ” segment of the  primary particle 

path.  The weighting factor s are the probabilities of a given number of ionizations of the primary 

particle to occur , which are assumed to  follow a  Poisson distribut ion . The  contribution s are 

hypothesized  to be convolutions of the probability distributions of the number o f ionizations in 

the target for a single ionization of the primary particle along the path segment.  As pointed out in 

Supplement 1 of  [55] , this implies the assumption  that  th e probability of  obtaining  a specific 

number of ionizations resulting from a single  ionization of the primary particle is independent  of 

the location  along the relevant path segment  in which  this interaction occurs. 

Author contributions: 

HR  Writing  – original draft, Writing  – review & editing 39 

Data availability :

No new data was produced. 

Declaration of c ompeting interests: 

The author declare s no known competing interests. 

Declaration of AI -assisted  technologies in the manuscript preparation process :

During the preparation of this work, the tool PTB -Translate (a derivate from deepl.com) was 

used to obtain suggestions for improving the quality of the language  and readability . Content 

produced by this tool was reviewed and used to edit the manuscript if deemed appropriate. The 

author takes full responsibility for the content of the  publication .

## References 

[1]  Schulte R. Nanodosimetry: Principle and Current Status. AIP Conference Proceedings 

2011;1345:249. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3576171. 

[2]  Bantsar A, Colautti P, Conte V, Hilgers G, Pietrzak M, Pszona S, et al. State of The Art of 

Instrumentation in Experimental Nanodosimetry. Radiat Prot Dosim 2018;180:177 –81. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncx263. 

[3]  Rabus H. Nanodosimetry  – on the “tracks” of biological radiation effectiveness. Z Med Phys 

2020;30:91 –4. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.zemedi.2020.01.002. 

[4]  Rucinski A, Biernacka A, Schulte R. Applications of nanodosimetry in particle therapy 

planning and beyond. Phys Med Biol 2021;66:24TR01. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -

6560/ac35f1. 

[5]  Goodhead DT. Initial Events in the Cellular Effects of Ionizing Radiations: Clustered 

Damage in DNA. International Journal of Radiation Biology 1994;65:7 –17. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/09553009414550021. 

[6]  Nikjoo H, O´Neill PO, Terrissol M, Goodhead DT. Modelling of radiation -induced DNA 

damage: the early physical and chemical event. International Journal of Radiation Biology 

1994;66:453 –7. 

[7]  Hill MA. Track to the future: historical perspective on the importance of radiation track 

structure and DNA as a radiobiological target. International Journal of Radiation Biology 

2017;94:759 –68. https://doi.org/10.1080/09553002.2017.1387304. 

[8]  Pszona S. A Track Ion Counter. Proceedings Fifth Symposium on Microdosimetry, vol. EUR 

5452 d -e-f, Luxemburg: Commission of the European Communities; 1975, p. 1107 –22. 

https://doi.org/http://www.ipj.gov.pl/ p2/PFM/PAPERS/V -Sym -Mic -1975 -p1107.pdf. 

[9]  Pszona S, Gajewski R. An Approach to Experimental Microdosimetry at the Nanometre 

Scale. Radiation Protection Dosimetry 1994;52:427 –30. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.rpd.a082228. 

[10]  Shchemelinin S, Breskin A, Chechik R, Pansky A, Colautti P, Conte V, et al. Ionization 

measurements in small gas samples by single ion counting. Nucl Instrum Meth A 

1996;368:859 –61. https://doi.org/10.1016/0168 -9002(95)00874 -8. 

[11]  Shchemelinin S, Breskin A, Chechik R, Colautti P, Schulte RWM. First measurements of 

ionization clusters on the DNA scale in a wall -less sensitive volume. Radiat Prot Dosim 

1999;82:43 –50. 

[12]  De Nardo L, Alkaa A, Khamphan C, Conte V, Colautti P, Ségur P, et al. A detector for track -

nanodosimetry. Nucl Instrum Meth A 2002;484:312 –26. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168 -

9002(01)01989 -1. 

[13]  Pszona S, Kula J, Marjanska S. A new method for measuring ion clusters produced by 

charged particles in nanometre track sections of DNA size. Nucl Instrum Meth A 

2000;447:601 –7. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168 -9002(99)01191 -2. 40 

[14]  Garty G, Shchemelinin S, Breskin A, Chechik R, Orion I, P. Guedes G, et al. Wall -less Ion -

counting Nanodosimetry Applied to Protons. Radiation Protection Dosimetry 

2002;99:325 –30. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.rpd.a006794. 

[15]  Grosswendt B. On the Equivalence of Propane -based Tissue -equivalent Gas and Liquid 

Water with Respect to the Ionisation -yield Formation by Electrons and a -particles. 

Radiation Protection Dosimetry 2002;99:401 –4. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.rpd. a006818. 

[16]  Titt U, Dangendorf V, Großwendt B, Schuhmacher H. Development and application of an 

optical TPC for charged particle track structure imaging in microdosimetry. Nucl Instrum 

Meth A 2002;477:536 –9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168 -9002(01)01917 -9. 

[17]  Bashkirov V, Schulte R, Breskin A, Chechik R, Schemelinin S, Garty G, et al. Ion -counting 

nanodosemeter with particle tracking capabilities. Radiation Protection Dosimetry 

2006;122:415 –9. https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncl470. 

[18]  Casiraghi M, Bashkirov VA, Hurley RF, Schulte RW. Characterisation of a track structure 

imaging detector. Radiation Protection Dosimetry 2015;166:223 –7. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncv139. 

[19]  Vasi F, Casiraghi M, Bashkirov V, Giesen U, Schulte RW. Development of a single ion 

detector for radiation track structure studies. Journal of Instrumentation 2016;11:C09021. 

https://doi.org/10.1088/1748 -0221/11/09/c09021. 

[20]  Vasi F, Kempf I, Besserer J, Schneider U. FIRE: A compact nanodosimeter detector based 

on ion amplification in gas. Nucl Instrum Meth A 2021;999:165116. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2021.165116. 

[21]  Kempf I, Hoffmann TM, Besserer J, Schneider U. Development and characterization of a 

compact nanodosimetric detector. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research 

Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 

2025;1075: 170337. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2025.170337. 

[22]  Grosswendt B. Basic aspects of photon transport through matter with respect to track 

structure formation. Radiat Environ Biophys 1999;38:147 –61. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s004110050151. 

[23]  Grosswendt B. The Track Structure of Photons, Electrons and  α-Particles from the Point of 

View of the Formation of Ionization Clusters. In: Kling A, Baräo FJC, Nakagawa M, Távora L, 

Vaz P, editors. Advanced Monte Carlo for Radiation Physics, Particle Tran sport Simulation 

and Applications, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2001, p. 237 –50. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-642 -18211 -2_39. 

[24]  Grosswendt B. Formation of ionization clusters in nanometric structures of propane -based 

tissue -equivalent gas or liquid water by electrons and  α-particles. Radiat Environ Biophys 

2002;41:103 –12. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00411 -002 -0155 -6. 

[25]  Bug M, Gargioni E, Nettelbeck H, Baek WY, Hilgers G, Rozenfeld A, et al. Ionization cross 

section data of nitrogen, methane, and propane for light ions and electrons and their 

suitability for use in track structure simulations. Phys Rev E 2013;88:043308 ( 21p.). 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.88.043308. 

[26]  Nikjoo H, Uehara S, Khvostunov IG, Cucinotta FA, Wilson WE, Goodhead DT. Monte Carlo 

track structure for radiation biology and space applications. Physica Medica 2001;17:38 –

44. 

[27]  Liamsuwan T, Nikjoo H. A Monte Carlo track structure simulation code for the full -slowing -

down carbon projectiles of energies 1 keV u  –1 –10 MeV u  –1 in water. Phys Med Biol 

2013;58:673 –701. https://doi.org/10.1088/0031 -9155/58/3/673. 

[28]  Friedland W, Dingfelder M, Kundrát P, Jacob P. Track structures, DNA targets and radiation 

effects in the biophysical Monte Carlo simulation code PARTRAC. Mutat Res 2011;711:28 –

40. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2011.01.003. 

[29]  Bug MU, Baek WY, Rabus H. Simulation of ionisation clusters formed in nanometric 

volumes of the deoxyribose -substitute tetrahydrofuran. International Journal of Radiation 

Biology 2012;88:137 –42. https://doi.org/10.3109/09553002.2011.610864. 41 

[30]  Incerti S, Baldacchino G, Bernal M, Capra R, Champion C, Francis Z, et al. The Geant4 -DNA 

project. Int J Model Simul Sci Comput 2010;1:157 –78. 

https://doi.org/10.1142/S1793962310000122. 

[31]  Incerti S, Ivanchenko A, Karamitros M, Mantero A, Moretto P, Tran HN, et al. Comparison 

of GEANT4 very low energy cross section models with experimental data in water. Med 

Phys 2010;37:4692 –708. https://doi.org/10.1118/1.3476457. 

[32]  Bernal MA, Bordage MC, Brown JMC, Davídková M, Delage E, El Bitar Z, et al. Track 

structure modeling in liquid water: A review of the Geant4 -DNA very low energy extension 

of the Geant4 Monte Carlo simulation toolkit. Phys Medica 2015;31:861 –74. 

https://do i.org/10.1016/j.ejmp.2015.10.087. 

[33]  Incerti S, Kyriakou I, Bernal MA, Bordage MC, Francis Z, Guatelli S, et al. Geant4 ‐DNA 

example applications for track structure simulations in liquid water: A report from the 

Geant4 ‐DNA Project. Med Phys 2018;45:e722 –39. https://doi.org/10.1002/mp.13048. 

[34]  Matsuya Y, Kai T, Sato T, Liamsuwan T, Sasaki K, Nikjoo H. Verification of KURBUC -based 

ion track structure mode for proton and carbon ions in the PHITS code. Phys Med Biol 

2021;66:06NT02. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -6560/abe65e. 

[35]  Schulte R, Bashkirov V, Shchemelinin S, Garty G, Chechik R, Breskin A. Modeling of 

radiation action based on nanodosimetric event spectra. Phys Medica 2001;17 Suppl 

1:177 –80. 

[36]  Faddegon B, Blakely EA, Burigo L, Censor Y, Dokic I, Domínguez Kondo N, et al. Ionization 

detail parameters and cluster dose: a mathematical model for selection of nanodosimetric 

quantities for use in treatment planning in charged particle radiotherapy. P hys Med Biol 

2023;68:175013. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -6560/acea16. 

[37]  Lindborg L, Grindborg JE. Nanodosimetric Results and Radiotherapy Beams: A Clinical 

Application? Radiation Protection Dosimetry 1997;70:541 –6. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.rpd.a032013. 

[38]  Lindborg L, Hultqvist M, Tedgren  \AA Carlsson, Nikjoo H. Nanodosimetry and RBE values 

in radiotherapy. Radiation Protection Dosimetry 2015;166:339 –42. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncv196. 

[39]  Grosswendt B, Pszona S. The track structure of alpha -particles from the point of view of 

ionization -cluster formation in “nanometric” volumes of nitrogen. Radiat Environ Biophys 

2002;41:91 –102. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00411 -002 -0144 -9. 

[40]  Grosswendt B. Recent advances of nanodosimetry. Radiation Protection Dosimetry 

2004;110:789 –99. https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/nch171. 

[41]  Grosswendt B, De Nardo L, Colautti P, Pszona S, Conte V, Tornielli G. Experimental 

equivalent cluster -size distributions in nanometric volumes of liquid water. Radiation 

Protection Dosimetry 2004;110:851 –7. https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/nch203. 

[42]  Grosswendt B. Nanodosimetry, the metrological tool for connecting radiation physics with 

radiation biology. Radiat Prot Dosim 2006;122:404 –14. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncl469. 

[43]  Hilgers G. Check of the scaling procedure of track structures of ionizing radiation in 

nanometric volumes. Radiat Meas 2010;45:1228 –32. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radmeas.2010.06.039. 

[44]  Hilgers G, Braunroth T, Rabus H. Characterisation of the PTB ion counter nanodosimeter’s 

target volume and its equivalent size in terms of liquid H2O. Radiat Phys Chem 

2022;191:109862. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2021.109862. 

[45]  Conte V, Selva A, Colautti P, Hilgers G, Rabus H. Track structure characterization and its 

link to radiobiology. Radiat Meas 2017;106:506 –11. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.Radmeas.2017.06.010. 

[46]  Mietelska M, Pietrzak M, Bancer A, Ruciński A, Szefliński Z, Brzozowska B. Ionization Detail 

Parameters for DNA Damage Evaluation in Charged Particle Radiotherapy: Simulation 

Study Based on Cell Survival Database. IJMS 2024;25:5094. 

https://doi.org/10.339 0/ijms25105094. 42 

[47]  Conte V, Selva A, Colautti P, Hilgers G, Rabus H, Bantsar A, et al. Nanodosimetry: towards 

a new concept of radiation quality. Radiat Prot Dosim 2018;180:150 –6. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncx175. 

[48]  Conte V, Colautti P, Grosswendt B, Moro D, Nardo LD. Track structure of light ions: 

experiments and simulations. New Journal of Physics 2012;14:093010. 

https://doi.org/10.1088/1367 -2630/14/9/093010. 

[49]  Hilgers G, Bug M, Rabus H. Measurement of track structure parameters of low and medium 

energy helium and carbon ions in nanometric volumes. Phys Med Biol 2017;62:7569 –97. 

[50]  Pietrzak M. On the two modes of nanodosimetric experiment. Radiat Prot Dosim 

2019;183:187 –91. https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncy233. 

[51]  Bueno M, Schulte R, Meylan S, Villagrasa C. Influence of the geometrical detail in the 

description of DNA and the scoring method of ionization clustering on nanodosimetric 

parameters of track structure: a Monte Carlo study using Geant4 -DNA. Phys Med Biol 

2015;60:8583 –99. https://doi.org/10.1088/0031 -9155/60/21/8583. 

[52]  Ramos -Méndez J, Burigo LN, Schulte R, Chuang C, Faddegon B. Fast calculation of 

nanodosimetric quantities in treatment planning of proton and ion therapy. Phys Med Biol 

2018;63:235015. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -6560/aaeeee. 

[53]  Dai T, Li Q, Liu X, Dai Z, He P, Ma Y, et al. Nanodosimetric quantities and RBE of a clinically 

relevant carbon ‐ion beam. Med Phys 2020;47:772 –80. https://doi.org/10.1002/mp.13914. 

[54]  Yang J -F, Liu X -G, Zhang H, He P -B, Ma Y -Y, Shen G -S, et al. Modified logistic nanodosimetry 

model for calculating relative biological effectiveness. NUCL SCI TECH 2025;36:61. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s41365 -025 -01646 -y. 

[55]  Rabus H, Thomas L. On a revised concept of an event that allows linking nanodosimetry 

and microdosimetry in nanometric sites with macroscopic dosimetry. Radiat Phys Chem 

2025;232:112640. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2025.112640. 

[56]  Selva A, Conte V, Colautti P. A Monte Carlo tool for multi -target nanodosimetry. Radiat Prot 

Dosim 2018;180:182 –6. https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncy027. 

[57]  Braunroth T, Nettelbeck H, Ngcezu SA, Rabus H. Three -dimensional nanodosimetric 

characterisation of proton track structure. Radiat Phys Chem 2020;176:109066. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2020.109066. 

[58]  Braunroth T, Nettelbeck H, Ngcezu SA, Rabus H. Corrigendum to 'Three -dimensional 

nanodosimetric characterisation of proton track structure’ [Radiation Physics and 

Chemistry 176 (2020) 109066]. Radiat Phys Chem 2021;186:109535. 

https://doi.org/https://doi. org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2021.109535. 

[59]  Braunroth T, Nettelbeck H, Ngcezu SA, Rabus H. Corrigendum to “Three -dimensional 

nanodosimetric characterisation of proton track structure”, [Braunroth et al. Radiation 

Physics and Chemistry 176 (2020) 109066]. Radiation Physics and Chemistry 

2025;235:112 826. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2025.112826. 

[60]  Braunroth T, Nettelbeck H, Ngcezu SA, Rabus H. Corrigendum to “Three -dimensional 

nanodosimetric characterisation of proton track structure” [Radiat. Phys. Chem. 176 

109066]. Radiation Physics and Chemistry 2026;247:114009. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphy schem.2026.114009. 

[61]  Rabus H, Ngcezu SA, Braunroth T, Nettelbeck H. “Broadscale” nanodosimetry: 

Nanodosimetric track structure quantities increase at distal edge of spread -out proton 

Bragg peaks. Radiat Phys Chem 2020;166:108515. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radp hyschem.2019.108515. 

[62]  Rabus H, Ngcezu SA, Braunroth T, Nettelbeck H. Corrigendum to “Broadscale” 

nanodosimetry: Nanodosimetric track structure quantities increase at distal edge of 

spread -out proton Bragg peaks [Radiat. Phys. Chem. 166 108515]. Radiation Physics and 

Chemistry  2026;247:114008. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2026.114008. 

[63]  Selva A, Bolst D, Bianchi A, Guatelli S, Conte V. Energy imparted and ionisation yield at the 

nanometre scale: results for extended beams. Radiat Prot Dosim 2023;199:1984 –8. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncac253. 43 

[64]  Hilgers G, Rabus H. Correlated ionisations in two spatially separated nanometric volumes 

in the track structure of 241Am alpha particles: Measurements with the PTB ion counter. 

Radiat Phys Chem 2020;176:109025. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ra dphyschem.2020.109025. 

[65]  Hilgers G, Braunroth T, Rabus H. Correlated ionisations in two spatially separated 

nanometric volumes within the track structure of 241Am alpha particles: comparison with 

Monte Carlo simulations. Radiat Phys Chem 2022;201:110488. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j .radphyschem.2022.110488. 

[66]  Alexander F, Villagrasa C, Rabus H, Wilkens J. Energy dependent track structure 

parametrisations for protons and carbon ions based on nanometric simulations. Eur Phys 

J D 2015;69:216 -1-216 –7. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjd/e2015 -60206 -5. 

[67]  Casiraghi M, Schulte R. Nanodosimetry -based plan optimization for particle therapy. 

Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine 2015;2015:1 –13. 

https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/908971. 

[68]  Palmans H, Rabus H, Belchior A, Bug M, Galer S, Giesen U, et al. Future development of 

biologically relevant dosimetry. Brit J Radiol 2015;88:20140392. 

https://doi.org/10.1259/bjr.20140392. 

[69]  Schneider U, Vasi F, Schmidli K, Besserer J. A model of radiation action based on 

nanodosimetry and the application to ultra -soft X-rays. Radiat Environ Biophys 

2020;59:439 –50. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00411 -020 -00842 -1. 

[70]  Laczko G, Dangendorf V, Kramer M, Schardt D, Tittelmeier K. High -resolution heavy ion 

track structure imaging. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: 

Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 2004;535:216 –20. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168 -9002(04)01606 -7. 

[71]  Pietrzak M, Pszona S, Bantsar A. Measurements of spatial correlations of ionisation 

clusters in the track of carbon ions  - First results. Radiat Prot Dosim 2018;180:162 –7. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncy079. 

[72]  Hilgers G, Schwarze M, Rabus H. Nanodosimetric investigation of the track structure of 

therapeutic carbon ion radiation part 1: measurement of ionization cluster size 

distributions. Biomed Phys Eng Express 2024;10:065030. https://doi.org/10.1088/2057 -

1976 /ad7bc1. 

[73]  Schwarze M, Hilgers G, Rabus H. Nanodosimetric investigation of the track structure of 

therapeutic carbon ion radiation part2: detailed simulation. Biomed Phys Eng Express 

2025;11:015018. https://doi.org/10.1088/2057 -1976/ad9152. 

[74]  Alexander F, Villagrasa C, Rabus H, Wilkens J. Local weighting of nanometric track 

structure properties in macroscopic voxel geometries for particle beam treatment 

planning. Phys Med Biol 2015;60:9145 –56. https://doi.org/10.1088/0031 -

9155/60/23/9145. 

[75]  Schwarze M, Looe HK, Poppe B, Tappayuthpijarn P, Thomas L, Rabus H. Cluster Dose 

Prediction in Carbon Ion Therapy: Using Transfer Learning from a Pretrained Dose 

Prediction U -Net. Biom Phys Eng Express 2026;12. 

[76]  Yang J, Liu X, Zhang H, Dai Z, He P, Ma Y, et al. Nanodosimetric quantity -weighted dose 

optimization for carbon -ion treatment planning. Phys Eng Sci Med 2024;47:703 –15. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s13246 -024 -01399 -9. 

[77]  Grosswendt B. Nanodosimetry, from radiation physics to radiation biology. Radiat Prot 

Dosim 2005;115:1 –9. https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/nci152. 

[78]  Grosswendt B, Pszona S, Bantsar A. New descriptors of radiation quality based on 

nanodosimetry, a first approach. Radiation Protection Dosimetry 2007;126:432 –44. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncm088. 

[79]  Friedland W, Jacob P, Paretzke HG, Stork T. Monte Carlo Simulation of the Production of 

Short DNA Fragments by Low -Linear Energy Transfer Radiation Using Higher -Order DNA 

Models. Radiat Res 1998;150:170. https://doi.org/10.2307/3579852. 44 

[80]  Folkard M, Prise KM, Vojnovic B, Davies S, Roper MJ. Measurement of DNA damage by 

electrons with energies between 25 and 4000 eV. International Journal of Radiation Biology 

1993;64:651 –8. 

[81]  Simmons JA, Watt DE. Radiation protection dosimetry: a radical reappraisal. Madison, 

Wis: Medical Physics Pub; 1999. 

[82]  Charlton DE, Nikjoo H, Humm JL. Calculation of Initial Yields of Single - and Double -strand 

Breaks in Cell Nuclei from Electrons, Protons and Alpha Particles. International Journal of 

Radiation Biology 1989;56:1 –19. https://doi.org/10.1080/0955300891455114 1. 

[83]  Friedland W, Jacob P, Bernhardt P, Paretzke HG, Dingfelder M. Simulation of DNA Damage 

after Proton Irradiation. Radiat Res 2003;159:401 –10. https://doi.org/10.1667/0033 -

7587(2003)159%5B0401:SODDAP%5D2.0.CO;2. 

[84]  Nikjoo H, Bolton CE, Watanabe R, Terrissol M, O’Neill P, Goodhead DT. Modelling of DNA 

damage induced by energetic electrons (100 eV to 100 keV). Radiat Prot Dosim 

2002;99:77 –80. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.rpd.a006843. 

[85]  Friedland W, Dingfelder M, Jacob P, Paretzke HG. Calculated DNA double -strand break 

and fragmentation yields after irradiation with He ions. Radiat Phys Chem 2005;72:279 –86. 

[86]  Nikjoo H, O’Neill P, Wilson WE, Goodhead DT. Computational approach for determining 

the spectrum of DNA damage induced by ionizing radiation. Radiat Res 2001;156:577 –83. 

[87]  Friedrich T, Scholz U, ElsaSser T, Durante M, Scholz M. Systematic analysis of RBE and 

related quantities using a database of cell survival experiments with ion beam irradiation. 

Journal of Radiation Research 2013;54:494 –514. https://doi.org/10.1093/jrr/r rs114. 

[88]  Nettelbeck H, Rabus H. Nanodosimetry: The missing link between radiobiology and 

radiation physics? Radiat Meas 2011;46:893 –7. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radmeas.2011.03.029. 

[89]  Rabus H, Nettelbeck H. Nanodosimetry: Bridging the gap to radiation biophysics. Radiat 

Meas 2011;46:1522 –8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radmeas.2011.02.009. 

[90]  Rabus H, Nettelbeck H. Corrigendum on: H. Rabus and H. Nettelbeck, Nanodosimetry: 

Bridging the Gap to Radiation Biophysics, Radiat. Meas. 46, (2011), 1522 -1528. Radiation 

Measurements 2026:107731. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radmeas.2026.107731. 

[91]  Taucher -Scholz G, Kraft G. Influence of radiation quality on the yield of DNA strand breaks 

in SV40 DNA irradiated in solution. Radiat Res 1999;151:595 –604. 

https://doi.org/10.2307/3580036. 

[92]  Garty G, Schulte R, Shchemelinin S, Grosswendt B, Leloup C, Assaf G, et al. First attempts 

at prediction of DNA strand -break yields using nanodosimetric data. Radiation Protection 

Dosimetry 2006;122:451 –4. https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncl515. 

[93]  Garty G, Schulte R, Shchemelinin S, Leloup C, Assaf G, Breskin A, et al. A nanodosimetric 

model of radiation -induced clustered DNA damage yields. Phys Med Biol 2010;55:761 –81. 

https://doi.org/10.1088/0031 -9155/55/3/015. 

[94]  Bug MU, Hilgers G, Baek WY, Rabus H. Nanodosimetric characterization of ion beams. Eur 

Phys J D 2014;68:217. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjd/e2014 -50015 -9. 

[95]  Shchemelinin S, Garty G, Breskin A, Chechik R, Schulte RWM. Ion -counting 

nanodosimetry: a new method for assessing radiation damage to DNA. Nucl Instrum Meth 

A 2002;477:527 –30. 

[96]  Leloup C, Garty G, Assaf G, Cristovão A, Breskin A, Chechik R, et al. Evaluation of lesion 

clustering in irradiated plasmid DNA. International Journal of Radiation Biology 

2005;81:41 –54. https://doi.org/10.1080/09553000400017895. 

[97]  Schulte RW, Wroe AJ, Bashkirov VA, Garty GY, Breskin A, Chechik R, et al. Nanodosimetry -

based quality factors for radiation protection in space. Z Med Phys 2008;18:286 –96. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.zemedi.2008.06.011. 

[98]  Garty G, Shchemelinin S, Breskin A, Chechik R, Assaf G, Orion I, et al. The performance of 

a novel ion -counting nanodosimeter. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics 

Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 

2002;492:212 –35. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168 -9002(02)01278 -0. 45 

[99]  Selva A, Nadal VD, Cherubini R, Colautti P, Conte V. Towards the use of nanodosimetry to 

predict cell survival. Radiat Prot Dosim 2019;183:192 –6. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncy274. 

[100]  Conte V, Bianchi A, Selva A. Track Structure of Light Ions: The Link to Radiobiology. IJMS 

2023;24:5826. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24065826. 

[101]  Conte V, Bianchi A, Rabus H, Selva A. Nanodosimetry applied to aerobic and hypoxic cells. 

Radiat Phys Chem 2024;222:111835. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2024.111835. 

[102]  Rabus H, Palmans H, Hilgers G, Sharpe P, Pinto M, Villagrasa C, et al. Biologically Weighted 

Quantities in Radiotherapy: an EMRP Joint Research Project. EPJ Web Conf 2014;77:00021. 

https://doi.org/10.1051/epjconf/20147700021. 

[103]  Conte V, Colautti P, Moro D, Grosswendt B. Track structure of carbon ions: measurements 

and simulations. Radiation Protection Dosimetry 2014;161:445 –8. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/nct266. 

[104]  Hilgers G, Bug M, Gargioni E, Rabus H. Comparison of measured and Monte -Carlo 

simulated track structure parameters in nanometric volumes. Radiat Prot Dosim 

2014;161:441 –4. https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/nct265. 

[105]  Pszona S, Bantsar A, Nikjoo H. Ionization cluster size distribution for alpha particles: 

experiment, modelling. Radiation Protection Dosimetry 2006;122:28 –31. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncl421. 

[106]  Belloni F, Bettega D, Calzolari P, Cherubini R, Massariello P, Tallone L. Inactivation Cross 

Sections for Mammalian Cells Exposed to Charged Particles: A Phenomenological 

Approach. Radiation Protection Dosimetry 2002;99:199 –202. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/ox fordjournals.rpd.a006761. 

[107]  De Nardo L, Colautti P, Conte V, Baek WY, Grosswendt B, Tornielli G. Ionization -cluster 

distributions of alpha -particles in nanometric volumes of propane: measurement and 

calculation. Radiat Environ Biophys 2002;41:235 –56. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00411 -002 -

0171 -6. 

[108]  Barkas HW. Nuclear Research Emulsions, vol. I. New York and London: Academic Press; 

1963. 

[109]  Friedrich T, Pfuhl T, Scholz M. Update of the particle irradiation data ensemble (PIDE) for 

cell survival. Journal of Radiation Research 2021;62:645 –55. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/jrr/rrab034. 

[110]  Furusawa Y, Fukutsu K, Aoki M, Itsukaichi H, Eguchi -Kasai K, Ohara H, et al. Inactivation of 

Aerobic and Hypoxic Cells from Three Different Cell Lines by Accelerated 3He -, 12C - and 

20Ne -Ion Beams. Radiation Research 2000;154. https://doi.org/10.1667/0033 -

7587(2000)154%5B0485:IOAAHC%5D2.0.CO;2. 

[111]  Bordieri G, Cartechini G, Bianchi A, Selva A, Conte V, Missiaggia M, et al. One scale to rule 

them all: interpretable multi -scale Deep Learning for predicting cell survival after proton 

and carbon ion irradiation. arXiv:260115106 [PhysicsBio -Ph] 2026. 

htt ps://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2601.15106. 

[112]  Bird RP, Rohrig N, Colvett RD, Geard CR, Marino SA. Inactivation of synchronized Chinese 

Hamster V79 cells with charged -particle track segments. Radiat Res 1980;82:277 –89. 

[113]  Besserer J, Schneider U. A track -event theory of cell survival. Z Med Phys 2015;25:168 –75. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.zemedi.2014.10.001. 

[114]  Besserer J, Schneider U. Track -event theory of cell survival with second -order repair. 

Radiat Environ Biophys 2015;54:167 –74. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00411 -015 -0584 -7. 

[115]  Schneider U, Vasi F, Besserer J. The probabilities of one - and multi -track events for 

modeling radiation -induced cell kill. Radiat Environ Biophys 2017;56:249 –54. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00411 -017 -0697 -2. 

[116]  Schneider U, Vasi F, Schmidli K, Besserer J. Track Event Theory: A cell survival and RBE 

model consistent with nanodosimetry. Radiat Prot Dosim 2019;183:17 –21. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncy236. 46 

[117]  Hug O, Kellerer A. Zur Interpretation der Dosiswirkungsbeziehungen in der 

Strahlenbiologie. Biophysik 1963;1:20 –32. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01192565. 

[118]  Ngcezu SA, Rabus H. Investigation into the foundations of the track -event theory of cell 

survival and the radiation action model based on nanodosimetry. Radiat Environ Biophys 

2021;60:559 –78. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00411 -021 -00936 -4. 

[119]  Schneider U, Vasi F, Besserer J. The Impact of the Geometrical Structure of the DNA on 

Parameters of the Track -Event Theory for Radiation Induced Cell Kill. PLoS One 2016;11:1 –

13. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0164929. 

[120]  Semenenko VA, Turner JE, Borak TB. NOREC, a Monte Carlo code for simulating electron 

tracks in liquid water. Radiation and Environmental Biophysics 2003;42:213 –7. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00411 -003 -0201 -z. 

[121]  Burigo LN, Ramos -Méndez J, Bangert M, Schulte RW, Faddegon B. Simultaneous 

optimization of RBE -weighted dose and nanometric ionization distributions in treatment 

planning with carbon ions. Phys Med Biol 2019;64:015015. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -

6560/aa f400. 

[122]  Ortiz R, Faddegon B. Creating uniform cluster dose spread -out Bragg peaks for proton and 

carbon beams. Medical Physics 2024;51:4482 –8. https://doi.org/10.1002/mp.16991. 

[123]  Facchiano S, Ortiz R, Cristoforetti R, D -Kondo N, Jaekel O, Faddegon B, et al. An ion 

treatment planning framework for inclusion of nanodosimetric ionization detail through 

cluster dose. arXiv:250509667 2025. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.09667. 

[124]  Ortiz R, Ramos -Méndez J, D -Kondo N, Faddegon B. A refined approach to compute 

nanodosimetric quantities for proton and ion radiotherapy treatment planning. Phys Med 

Biol 2025;70:235023. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -6560/ae2230. 

[125]  Thomas L, Schwarze M, Rabus H. Radial dependence of ionization clustering around a gold 

nanoparticle irradiated by x -rays under charged particle equilibrium. Phys Med Biol 

2024;69:185014. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -6560/ad6e4f. 

[126]  Ortiz R, Ramos -Méndez J, Mao J -H, Schulte R, Faddegon B. Evaluation of nanodosimetric 

quantities for ion radiotherapy treatment planning based on the degree of association of 

survival with cluster dose. Phys Med Biol 2025;70:195004. https://doi.org/10.108 8/1361 -

6560/ae07a3. 

[127]  Schwarze M, Looe HK, Poppe B, Thomas L, Rabus H. Cluster Dose Prediction in Carbon Ion 

Therapy: Using Transfer Learning from a Pretrained Dose Prediction U-Net. 

arXiv:251024703 [PhysicsMed -Ph] 2025. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2510.24703. 

[128]  Schwarze M, Looe HK, Poppe B, Thomas L, Rabus H. Cross -Section -Based Scaling Method 

for Material -Specific Cluster Dose Calculations. Biom Phys Eng Express 2025;11:067001. 

https://doi.org/10.1088/2057 -1976/ae1a8d. 

[129]  Blakely EA, Tobias CA, Yang TCH, Smith KC, Lyman JT. Inactivation of Human Kidney Cells 

by High -Energy Monoenergetic Heavy -Ion Beams. Radiation Research 1979;80:122. 

https://doi.org/10.2307/3575121. 

[130]  Dokic I, Mairani A, Niklas M, Zimmermann F, Chaudhri N, Krunic D, et al. Next generation 

multi -scale biophysical characterization of high precision cancer particle radiotherapy 

using clinical proton, helium -, carbon - and oxygen ion beams. Oncotarget 2016; 7:56676 –

89. https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.10996. 

[131]  Braby LA, Conte V, Dingfelder M, Goodhead DT, Pinsky LS, Rosenfeld AB, et al. ICRU Report 

98, Stochastic Nature of Radiation Interactions: Microdosimetry. J ICRU 2023;23:1 –168. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/14736691231211380. 

[132]  Kellerer AM. Fundamentals of Microdosimetry. The Dosimetry of Ionizing Radiation, 

Academic Press; 1985, p. 77 –162. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978 -0-12 -400401 -6.50007 -3. 

[133]  Canhoto JF. Nanodosimetric characterisation of proton track structure: a comparison of 

sampling and clustering algorithms using Geant4DNA. arXiv:240604495 [PhysicsComp -

Ph] 2024. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.04495. 47 

[134]  Friedrich T, Ilicic K, Greubel C, Girst S, Reindl J, Sammer M, et al. DNA damage interactions 

on both nanometer and micrometer scale determine overall cellular damage. Scientific 

Reports 2018;8:16063. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -018 -34323 -9. 

[135]  Baiocco G, Bartzsch S, Conte V, Friedrich T, Jakob B, Tartas A, et al. A matter of space: how 

the spatial heterogeneity in energy deposition determines the biological outcome of 

radiation exposure. Radiat Environ Biophys 2022. https://doi.org/10.1007/s004 11 -022 -

00989 -z. 

[136]  Kellerer AM, Rossi HH. The theory of dual radiation action. Current Topics in Radiation 

Research 1974;8:85 –158. 

[137]  Kellerer AM, Rossi HH. A Generalized Formulation of Dual Radiation Action. Radiat Res 

1978;75:471 –88. 

[138]  Rossi HH, Zaider M. Compound dual radiation action. I. General aspects. Radiat Res 

1992;132:178 –83. 

[139]  Villagrasa C, Bordage M -C, Bueno M, Bug M, Chiriotti S, Gargioni E, et al. Assessing the 

contribution of cross -sections to the uncertainty of Monte Carlo calculations in micro - and 

nanodosimetry. Radiat Prot Dosim 2019;183:11 –6. https://doi.org/10.1093/rp d/ncy240. 

[140]  Villagrasa C, Rabus H, Baiocco G, Perrot Y, Parisi A, Struelens L, et al. Intercomparison of 

micro - and nanodosimetry Monte Carlo simulations: An approach to assess the influence 

of different cross -sections for low -energy electrons on the dispersion of re sults. Radiat 

Meas 2022;150:106675. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radmeas.2021.106675. 

[141]  Villagrasa C, Baiocco G, Chaoui Z -E-A, Dingfelder M, Incerti S, Kundrát P, et al. Evaluation 

of the uncertainty in calculating nanodosimetric quantities due to the use of different 

interaction cross sections in Monte Carlo track structure codes. PLoS One 

2026;21:e0340500. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0340500. 

[142]  Kyriakou I, Papadopoulos A, Polopetrakis I, Kotroumpelou C, Plante I, Matsuya Y, et al. 

Intercomparison of low -energy electron transport calculations by different Monte Carlo 

track -structure simulation codes. Phys Med Biol 2026;71:085009. 

https://doi.org/ 10.1088/1361 -6560/ae5758. 

[143]  Merza V, Bancer A, Bashkirov V, Belchior A, Brzozowska B, Canhoto JF, et al. Experimental 

and Monte Carlo Simulation Studies to Investigate the Working Principle of Compact 

Nanodosimeters. arXiv:251211126 [PhysicsIns -Det] 2025. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/AR XIV.2512.11126. 48 

## 7 Supplement ary Figures 

0

Supplementary Fig.  1: Complementary cumulative frequency  𝐹 2 of ionization clusters containing  two  or 

more ionizations in the target volume of a nanodosimeter as a function of the corresponding mean number 

of ionizations,  𝑀 1 . The data  corresponds  to measurements with three different nanodosimeters and 

different ions as primary particles (see legend). Different data points for the same ion and instrument 

correspond to different energies of the ion. The Startrack nanodosimeter was always operated wi th 

propane ( 𝐶 3𝐻 8), the Jet Counter always with nitrogen ( 𝑁 2). The simulated target size in liquid water varied 

between about 2  nm for the Ion Counter and 20  nm for the Startrack nanodosimeter.  (Reprinted from 

Radiotherapy and Oncology 119 (Suppl. 1), H. Rabus and V. Conte, Nanodosimetry: from radiation physics 

to radiation biology, S182 -S183, Copyright (2016), with permission from Elsevier. )49 

Supplementary Fig.  2: Comparison of the  inactivation cross sections for HSG and CHO cells  at (a) 5  %

survival rate ( 𝜎 5% ) and (b) low doses  (𝜎 𝛼 ) as a function of  LET  (upper x -axis)  with  the  scaled nanodosimetric 

probabilit y F2 as a function of the mean  ionization  cluster size  M1 (lower x -axis ). To facilitate  distinguishing 

the data of the two cell lines , the HSG data (and corresponding  𝐶 5%  × 𝐹 2 and  𝐶 𝛼  × 𝐹 2) have been multiplied 

by 10.  Colored symbols represent biological data; grey symbols and solid lines represent the physical 

experimental data.  (Reprinted from Radiation Measurements 106 (1), V. Conte et al., Track structure 

characterization and its link to radiobiology, 506 -511, Copyright (2017), with permission from Elsevier. )50 

Supplementary Fig.  3Inactivation cross sections for  hypoxic  V79 (panels (a) and (b)) and HSG cells (panels 

(c) and (d)) at 5% survival (panels (a) and (c)) and at low doses (panels (b) and (d)). Experimental data are 

drawn with 20% uncertainty bars. The red lines represent the nanodosimetric quantities specified i n the 

legends. Note that the quantities  𝐹 ∗(𝑘 ) in the notation used by Conte et al.  are the probabilities of 

ionization -cluster size exceeding  𝑘  , i.e. , they are identical to the quantities  𝐹 𝑘 +1 in the not ation of this 

paper . Also note that  𝑝 (𝜈 ) is identical to  𝑃 𝜈 , so that  𝑝 (3) + 𝐹 ∗(3) = 𝐹 3. (Reprinted from Radiation Physics 

and Chemistry 222, V. Conte et al., Nanodosimetry applied to aerobic and hypoxic cells, 111835, Copyright 

(2024), with permission from Elsevier. )51 

Supplementary Fig.  4Inactivation cross sections for  aerobic  V79 (panels (a) and (b)) and HSG cells (panels 

(c) and (d)) at 5% survival (panels (a) and (c)) and at low doses (panels (b) and (d)). Experimental data are 

drawn with 20% uncertainty bars. The red lines represent the nanodosimetric quantities specified i n the 

legends.  Note that the quantities  𝐹 ∗(𝑘 ) in the notation used by Conte et al. are the probabilities of 

ionization -cluster size exceeding  𝑘  , i.e., they are identical to the quantities  𝐹 𝑘 +1 in the notation of this 

paper. Also note that  𝑝 (𝜈 ) is identical to  𝑃 𝜈 , so that  𝑝 (3) + 𝐹 ∗(3) = 𝐹 3. (Reprinted from Radiation Physics 

and Chemistry 222, V. Conte et al., Nanodosimetry applied to aerobic and hypoxic cells, 111835, Copyright 

(2024), with permission from Elsevier. )52 

Supplementary Fig.  5: Variation of the three statistical metrics for the deviation of the survival data with all 

ion types from  the best fit  to the linear -quadratic model (as a function of the cluster dose). The  x-axis of the 

plots is the minimum number of ions in an IC. The rows correspond to the three different metrics. The left 

and middle  panels  of each row are results for survival data under heavy ion irradiation from  [129]  under 

aerobic and hypoxic conditions, respectively. The right panel is for data of aerobic A549 cells 

[130] Reproduced under the CC BY 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)  from  [126] .

Copyright Ortiz et al. (2025). )